# Acknowledgements

It is a pleasant duty to acknowledge all those who have assisted us in any way in our preparation of this book. On the practical and technical side we must, first and foremost, mention Mr. M. T. Hallam for the special bow which he so kindly and skilfully constructed to enable us to apply the acid test of field trials to our Mameluke writer’s instructions. Without this bow, which has sturdily stood up to deliberate misuse and violent treatment for more than four years, many technical problems may never have been solved. Hardly less great is our debt to Mr. E. McEwen whose knowledge of Oriental composite bow design he patiently combined with his experience as a craftsman to prove by a first-class reconstruction that Taybughā's specifications for the best Mameluke bow of his day were indeed realistic. For practical advice on mounted archery, cavalry techniques, and equestrian matters generally, we are indebted to Colonel G. S. Courtney, O.B.E., and Mrs. Barbara Low. Valuable comments and suggestions on the technical aspects of archery have been made by many others with whom we have discussed our subject and, although we hesitate to single out names, we feel that it would be an injustice not to express especial thanks to Messrs. J. Flinton, G. F. Glover, E. G. Heath, D. S. Skinner, J. R. Wiggins, and Dr. D. J. F. Hill.

On the Arabic and Islamic side our greatest debt is to Professor C. F. Beckingham, Head of the Department of the Near and Middle East, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, who has very generously devoted a good deal of his valuable time to reading our typescript and making corrections and constructive criticism. It goes without saying that none of our errors are his - or indeed anyone else's - responsibility. In matters of weights and measures we acknowledge with gratitude the advice and assistance of Professor W, Hinz of Góttingen University; for resolving certain palacographical problems we are grateful to Dr. S. M.  Stern of All Souls College, Oxford; for valuable suggestions and advice on points of detail we owe particular debts to Professors D. Ayalon, A. F. L. Beeston, J. A. Boyle, the late V. Minorsky, J. Robson, J. Schacht, and Drs. H. H. Al-Hamdani, A. A. Kafrawy, M. Mowafy.

For permitting us to utilize manuscript materials and providing us with photostats, microfilms, and reproductions we express sincere thanks firstly to the British Museum and members of its staff, notably Dr. M. Lings and Messrs. G. Meredith-Owens and R. H. Pinder-Wilson, who have rendered generous service in many different ways. We next express our gratitude to the Aya Sofya and Topkapi Sarayn libraries (Istanbul), the Bibliothéque Nationale (Paris), the Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit (Leiden), the Bodleian Library (Oxford), Cambridge University Library, the Chester Beatty Library (Dublin), Edinburgh University Library, and Manchester University Library. We must at the same time thank Mr. W. Brice, Dr. Susan Skilliter, and Professor Beckingham for the time and trouble they took in seeking out manuscripts and obtaining microfilms for us during their travels in Turkey and elsewhere.

To Mrs. E. Simon, President of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries, we express our gratitude for her kindness in granting us access to manuscript notes on composite bows made by her late husband, Mr. Ingo Simon. Last, but by no means least, we wish to say how grateful we are to Dr. A. L. S. M. Lutful-Huq and the University of London for allowing us to consult and utilize his unpublished edition of the *Nihāyat as-su’l.
