# Appendix 6 - Qabaq and qighaj

(a) Qabag. From the text it will be gathered that gabag-shooting consisted in
shooting from horseback at an elevated mark affixed to the top of a mast. From
the name of the exercise (Turk.  gabag/kabak, ‘gourd’) we can take it that the
mark was originally a gourd, but, as we have cbserved (p. 77), the term was
subsequently applied to targets of a different and often more sophisticated
nature, such as containers for doves.

From the part, originally consisting of the gourd, the use of the term gabag
seems to have been transferred to the whole, consisting of the mast together
with its mounted target, and to have been replaced in the sense of ‘gourd’ by
the Arabic equivalent gar‘ak. Such at any rate is the impression to be gained
from the Mameluke historian, Abu l-Mahasin Ibn Taghribirdi (1409- 1410?-1470),
son of a most distinguished commander-in-chief, whose word in this matter can be
wholly relied upon (an-Nujim az-záhirah, Cairo edn., VIII, p. 6). According to
this author the gabag was a long pole surmounted by a gourd (gar‘ah) which
served as the horse archer’s ‘pigeon-box’ target. Successful shooting would earn
an archer not only a befitting robe of honour, but also the precious *cage'—if
we may call it such.

1040A different definition is given by an equally famous Mameluke historian,
al-Magrizi (1346- 1442), who was, however, likely to be less well informed on
the matter. His understanding of the term gabag was a high mast surmounted by a
wooden ring, or hoop, through which archers shot at a target. Whether his
archers were mounted or not is uncertain, for on this point his text is
ambiguous in that a verb (wagafa) is used which may mean either ‘to stand’ or
‘to come to a halt’, irrespective of whether the subject is mounted or on foot
(Khigaz, III, p. 180). Moreover, we cannot exclude the possibility that a simple
textual corruption obscures the function of wagafa as a mere verb of duration or
continuity (see Latham, BSOAS, XXXII, 1969, pp. 259-60).  Whatever the truth of
the matter, al-Maqrizi’s reference to the substitution of the mast and gourd by
a spear and hoop for training purposes induces the speculation whether he did
not confuse a means of practice with gabag-shooting proper. Alternatively, it
may be that in addition to its particular and restricted sense the expression
‘gabag-shooting’ was also used in a looser and more general sense, Indeed, in
the opening paragraph of our chapter the expression does occur with the extended
meaning ‘shooting at an elevated target’, albeit that ‘from horseback’ is
implicit.

(b) Qighaj. According to glosses in CD (see references, p. 77), the term derives
from a Turkish word meaning ‘slant, slanting, inclined, sloping, oblique’
(za’rib [sic], muwarrab, má'il). If it is justifiable, as it would appear, to
associate the borrowing with the Turkish Aigag in the sense ‘slope of a roof? or
‘out of true’ (Radioff, IT, col. 692), then the spelling gayghaj or gighaj which
occur in a number of MSS, including the early B?, are preferable from the point
of view of phonetic transcription to gaygaj or gigaj. Reinaud, transliterating
only from consonants, renders the term &ycadj (i.e. gigaj) and he may not be
unjustified, for ky-kaj is encountered in Lady Sheil’s Glimpses of Life and
Manners in Persia (London, 1856, p. 78). At all events, there is nothing

1041
172


APPENDIX 6 173

1042
unusual about the shift gh (g)>q, which is a common enough feature even in the
dialects of nomadic Arabs.


Whether the word as we have it is intended to describe the action of shooting in
an inclined plane or the position of the archer when making the shot, or, less
probably, the angle at which the target was set, is debatable. If we accept the
first possibility, the term is presumably intended to convey the notion that the
shot is not made in a horizontal plane. Neither, of course, is the shot so made
in the case of the gourd, but since shooting downwards from horseback at a
target at ground level is of greater practical importance, it is likely to have
antedated gourd-shooting and therefore established a prior claim to the
name. However that may be, what is fairly certain is that its original meaning
was gradually lost, for in a number of manuscript sources of our acquaintance
the grammatical treatment of the word and context suggest that it denoted some
kind of target. Reinaud also formed this impression and from the evidence at his
disposal inclined to the view that it was a butt made of a wicker basket filled
with sand (ibid., p. 221).  The explanation that springs most readily to mind is
one of semantic development; it is easy to see how gighaj by analogy with qabag
could come to denote the target and, equally, how 'gzghaj- shooting’ acquired
the looser and more general sense given in our text of ‘shooting downwards from
horseback’. It is less easy to explain Morier’s understanding of the term in
nineteenth- century Persia (Second Journey through Persia, London, 1818,
p. 169). The description that he gives in this connexion is that of an exercise
in which one group of horsemen in simulated flight before another suddenly turn
their heads and with agility transfix their pursuers.

1043The practical value of shooting at a ground target from horseback is obvious and
it is almost otiose to point out its application to the needs of hunting and
warfare.
