# Appendix 1 - Weight and measures

In the course of Islamic history the values of units of measurement used in the
Near and Middle East have varied according to time and place. Some impression of
the difficulties created in consequence may be formed from a perusal of the
Appendix to Arab Archery, in which it can be seen that measurements furnished by
the Arabic original left Faris and Elmer groping for equivalents (sects, 2, 6,
7, 11, 12, 13, respectively pp. 159-60, 165-66, 166, 172-74). The genera]
mensural problem is aggravated by the fact that an author writing in one part of
the Muslim world will, without acknowledgement, commonly quote, say, from
earlier works originating in other parts and, in so doing, transmit
specificatious expressed in terms identical in form with, but in value different
from, those used in his own area and period. In determining the equivalents of
units mentioned in the present work we have had the benefit of the unstinted
advice of a noted authority in the field, Professor Walther Hinz of the
University of Göttingen, author of Islamische Masse und Gewichte (Leiden, 1955)
and contributor of the article on the cubit in the new edition of the
Encyclopaedia of Islam (s.v. Dhira‘). We gratefully acknowledge his assistance.

985Fortunately for us, Taybughà does define his cubit as ‘the carpenter's cubit,
that is to say, the Hashimi cubit’ (p. 8). This statement in itself poses a
problem since we know of no carpenter’s cubit that is the same as the
Hashimite. However that may be, we have taken the latter as the basis of
conversion with a value of 66-5 cm., or 26-18 in., though it must be noted that
it varied between limits of 66-81 cm. and 66:27 cm. As for the girát, there were
24 to the cubit.

The ragi of Damascus was constant at 600 dirhams, of which the exact equivalent
is 1°85 kg., or 4:07 Ib. avoirdupois. The weight of the Damascus dirham was
therefore 3:086 grams, or 47-6 grains.

986Having established these equivalents for weights given in the early part of the
Ghunyah, we subsequently found mention of a bow of roo razis (Ch. 16, p. 86), or
407 lb. Since a bow of this weight is well beyond the limit of human strength it
became evident to us that the expression ‘r00 ratis! was either a figure of
speech or quoted from some other source (see p. 88). If the second of these
alternatives is the explanation, the bow of 100 rats is in all probability that
which is frequently linked in Arabic archery literature with the name of Tahir
ai-Balkhi, and the unit is almost certainly Iraqi. To the Iraqi rag? there were
either 128-4 dirhams or 130 dirhams, and, since the dirham equivalent is 3-125
grams, or 48-2 grains, the second figure—130, to which we incline—gives a ra?
cquivalent of 406-25 grains, or 14°3 oz.

All other problems apart, we must not lose sight of the hazard—encountered in
some MSS— of copyists’ interpolations which introduce standards other than those
intended. Thus, for instance, it does not follow that, because a text reads ‘x
raris Damascus weight’, the author wrote the words “Damascus weight’. The
copyist, once conditioned to this qualification, may have continucd to add it
where the author deliberately omitted it. We have personally encountered this
kind of interpolation and warn against uncritical acceptance of specifications
occurring in Arabic sources.

987
159


100 AGF FLNIS i

988
The following table summarizes the values offered by us for weights and measures
in the Middle East during the fourteenth century:


Damascus, or Syrjan, measure

989
Cubit 665 cm. 2618in.  . l Qirát 2:77 cm. 1:09 in. (for practical purposes I-I
in.)  Rat 1850'0 grams 407 lb.  Dirham 3:086 grams 476 grains Baghdad, or Iraqi,
measure Cubit 49:875 cm. 19:63 in.  Rail 406:25 prams I43 02.  Dirham 3:125
grams 482 grains Cairo, or Egyptian, measure Cubit 5404 cm. 21-28 in.  Rati 4375
grams 154 or.  Dirham 3:125 grams 48-2 grains NOTE: 100 ratis — — 1 qinjár


I2 üigtyyalts = 1 rau

990
The fist, the finger, and the arm-span were canonically standardized at 8-312
cm. (3:272 in.), 2-078 cm. (0'818 in.), and 1995 cm., or almost 2 metres (2:188
yds.). We find these equivalents quite acceptable, but are by no means convinced
that archers adhered exactly to such measures.  Certain indications in technical
literature suggest that rule of thumb was not unusual. Further- more, we do not
know for sure that the canonical arm-span (4 Iraqi cubits) was that of the
Mameluke archers in Syria. As regards the span, many dictionaries give an
equivalent of 9 in., but it may be concluded from p. 29 thar if the length of an
arrow is 30 in., the span would be 7$ in. As Elmer, a physician, points out, the
average man cannot—he presumably means without undue strain and stretch—span
much more than 8 in., whatever may be said to the contrary (Arab Archery,
p. 159).

One final word: where conversions are given in the text, we avoid unrealistic
numbers of decimal points and offer the nearest practical equivalents.
