# Appendix 5 - The reconstruction of Taybugha’s bow

The bow specified by our author in Chapter 3 is of considerable interest because
its dimensions do not agree with those of any other composite bow of which we
have knowledge. In the history of the Middle East successive waves of invaders,
intruders, and immigrants from Central Asia have introduced different kinds of
bow. The forms of ancient types from the twenty-third century B.C. to the sixth
century B.C, have been well presented +y Yigael Yadin in his Art of Warfare in
Biblical Lands (1963), but no one has yet fully pieced together the subsequent
history of the bow in that area up to more recent times as far as available
specimens in museums and private collections permit.

Henry Balfour in his illustration ‘Morphological Classification of the Composite
Bow’ (FRAI, LI, 1921, p. 309, Fig. 17) does show a relationship between the
various forms, but without any detailed measurements which might enable us to
check one type against another, In attempting to reconstruct his researches and
supply missing data we have been greatly hampered by lack of access to some of
the weapons he had found. Certain important private collections have been broken
up and sold, with the result that we do not know what has become of various rare
examples of earlier bows. There are, therefore, wide gaps in our knowledge. This
being so, we need not explain the importance of unearthing the dimensions of a
hitherto unknown form of composite.

1035Our bow may directly descend from some particular Central Asian type, though we
have no direct evidence to support the hypothesis. Equally, it may have been
developed under any, or many, of a variety of influences that had accumulated
there from Ayyübid to Mameluke times or even earlier. If pressed to relate it to
any known form of composite, we would suggest that its resemblance to a
Sino-Tartar (see Fig. 26,c) with shortened ears is the closest conceivable, and
this is as far as we can go.

From the somewhat scanty information available in the Ghunyah Edward McEwen
graciously undertook to attempt a reconstruction for us. In so doing he followed
the Ottoman practice of hollowing the horn slightly and then made the wooden
core—of maple—correspondingly convex.  Both surfaces were deeply scored to give
greater purchase to the glue. The grip section was made from a piece of oak and
the ears from beech strengthened with inserts of horn, The veneer applied to the
sinew backing was taken from the inner bark of white poplar. One unknown factor
proved to be the amount of reflex allowed in the grip. An interesting point
which emerged from the reconstruction was that when a string of the specified
length (p. 21 above) was fitted, the resultant bracing height was 71 in. It was
found, however, that the reflex could be reduced, as also the angle of the siyaA
in relation to the working part of the limb, to achieve the same result, Which
form was the original, we cannot say, and it is doubtful whether the problem,
like that of the grip, will ever be resolved with any certainty.

1036Despite the short styahs, the bow is of an efficient design and well suited to
hunting or warfare as we have proved in field trials. With a weight of about 50
Ib. at full draw it shot a 30-in. arrow over a distance of 285 yards. This is a
satisfactory performance by any standards.


170

1037
APPENDIX 5 171


Plate 18 (1) shows the bow in the shape to which it settled after reasonable
use. It had, of course, been reflexed into a complete circle during the final
stages of manufacture. In (2) we see the bow strung and ready for usc. It has a
pleasing appearance, and we may observe that it is often the case that if a bow
looks well, its design is good. In (3) the bow is shown on a tiller at the full
draw of 30 in. It should be noted that a correctly designed bow at full draw
should have a string at right-angles to the ear so that maximum advantage may be
taken of the leverage afforded by the siya.

1038
We express our sincere thanks to Mr. McEwen for his interest and trouble in
producing this excellent reconstruction.
