# Appendix 2 - The bow: terminalogy


993
a. The centre of the bow is taken to mark the end of the upper limb, which, it
will be recalled, is longer than the lower. The explanation of the ‘shooting
limb’ in Arab Archery, p. 14, is that the upper limb is so called “because it
accounts for most of the shooting’. It is less satisfactory than the one we have
here.

b. D: “it is called bayt katt al-watr’, i.e. the limb from which the string is
removed, presumably when onc unbraces. C's explanation 1s based, it scems, on a
misunderstanding of the meanings of hart and /sgát in this context.

994C. In Arab Archery, p. 15, the zifr (gufr), or ‘usfur), is given as the part
between the nock and the


II

995
162 APPENDIX 2



996


7 Nail(Zufr) S Nock (Fard)

997



998

Sinew (Aqab) Bowstring loop Urwah) Knee (Rukbah) yi i Neck ('Unq) Working part
of / | the limb e Back (Zahr) — — — Bowstring(Watr)

999
Arrow Pass


(Dimak) SB Grip} PA (Qabda ) f 7 RA

1000
mate lo A c m T


Fic. 54. THe Bow: TERMINOLOGY The upper, or ‘shooting’, limb {bayt ar-ramy) of a
composite bow from India, Cf. Taybugha’s terms in Fig 5-

1001
APPENDIX 2 163


extremity of the siyah. In the Mukhassas, VI, 43, it is given as the part
extending from beyond the place where the string is knotted to the end of the
bow, These definitions are more appropriate than those given here.

1002. In Arab Archery, p. 15, this term is taken to mean ‘string-stopper’, but there
is nothing in the Arabic to justify such a translation. The word could mean a
‘sinew-binding’, however.

. Hence bayt can mean either the entire limb, including the siyah, or only the
working part of the limb,

1003. This expression normally means ‘cusps of the nock’ of an arrow. Perhaps we
should read farg ‘division’ for fag, translating as ‘the sides of the division’,
i.e. of the splice. The term daffah also occurs in Arab Archery, p. 15, where it
is said that ‘The end of each arm adjacent to the grip, where flexibility
begins, is called a daffah’.

. The reading hudüd is uncertain. The same sentence occurs in Arab Archery,
p. 15, where it has been read as khudrud. No bone covering has been found in the
handle of any extant Oriental composite, but such a feature does occur in Avar
and Magyar types up to the tenth

1004
century A.D.  . The English-speaking archer would term this ‘following the
string’.
