# On thumb-guards

Kushtuman? (‘thumb-guard’) is an arabicized form of a word borrowed from the
Persian. In Persian the term is angushtvan? ("ünger-protector') and in old
Arabic jam ah or, it is said, khai ah,”

361There are many kinds of thumb-guard to suit individual tastes and purposes,
Experience attests the value of that which is of a single layer of leather
without either padding* or lip (saysarah}, but it demands a great deal of
practice for the archer to be able to retain the string (with a steady
hold). For this reason a lip has been added, and 'now in its modified form this
type! is the most useful and convenient thumb-guard for all archers, Those who
have long thumbs should see that the lip is thick, while those with short thumbs
should keep it thin. This kind of guard will show up faults in locking (on which
see below, Ch. 10), and for this reason thumb- guards of bone and horn® are
often used. This type, however, even though it can conceal an archer’s faults,
may well break when most needed and thus put a man out of action. Some guards
are therefore made of gold or silver.? There are people, such as the Turkmens,
who use a plain circular band as a thumb-guard so that it can be kept on their
hands at all times like an ordinary silver signet ring (after the Chinese style?
Plate 7), This is an excellent type for persons who have to endure the hazards
of expeditionary operations (presumably because it could be kept in place for
immediate use). Some people even shoot without any thumb-guard at all, and by
dint of intense practice they become accustomed to so doing. There is no greater
asset than the ability to shoot in this way if one is so endowed."

The golden rule for a thumb-guard is that it should be exactly the size of the
thumb, neither bigger nor smaller.” According to Tahir, the use of a thick lip
will increase cast (atrad E-s-sahm ; in other words, be better for distance),
but greater accuracy!? will be attained (e.g. in target shooting) by the use of
a thin ore. The best policy is to adhere to that to which one is accustomed.  If
one has no particular habit in this respect, then it is better to follow the
instructions which we have given above, — -

362
_ COMMENT


It is regrettable that Taybugha should be so brief on such an important
subject. The author of Arab Archery is much more informative and offers some
interesting details on the making of

363
‘horn and leather thumb-guards (pp. 123-24),


1..Construction of the Guard

364
(a) The leather guard. This was made from a T-shaped piece of leather. The ends
of the horizontal portion were carefully sewn together to form a loop into which
the thumb could fit, while the stem was left to cover the inside of the pad at
the end of the thumb. The thumb-tip


34

365
ON THUMB-GUARDS 35


and knuckle remained uncovered, The authot’s assertion that the loop must fit
the thumb is . fully supported by experience. If it is too tight, discomfort
results at the draw and, if too loose, it is liable to be pulled off by the
bowstring upon release. It is also clear that the length and shape of the lip
need to be tailored to the requirements of the individual. A fine leather lining
and a lip like a smail broad bean is recommended in Arab Archery, whose author
adds that a slight groove should be impressed into the surface of the leather
(p. 123). This, presumably, would follow the crease of the thumb and would make
for consistent positioning of the string during

366
shooting.

(b) The drawing-ring (Middle East), The manufacture of a drawing-ring clearly
required far more care and attention than the leather guard, In existing
specimens the hole into which the thumb fits is slightly oval so that the ring
has to be turned through ninety degrees from its final position to slip over the
thumb-joint. When finally turned to its shooting position, it cannot possibly
slip off the thumb if the fit is correct. The shape of the inner surface depends
on the contour of the thumb. If too little of the inside of the lip is cut away,
the string will put excessive pressure on the inside of the thumb, while if too
much is cut away it may be very difficult to retain the string on the inner
upper surface of the ring during the draw. The curves of the inner and outer
surfaces of the lip are, to some extent, complementary, and their design must be
balanced against the shape of the thumb for which they are made. A ring would
therefore have to be made to measure by a careful craftsman with an eye for
detail, and all existing examples show this to have been the case. A
well-fitting ring is a pleasure to usc, and there can be no doubt that a really
successful one would have been highly prized by its owner. (See Plate 7.)

367



368b. Thumb


a. Leather Guard Ring

369
Fic. 17. THUMB-GUARDS


In addition to literature already indicated either above or in the notes the
reader might profitably consult J. Flinton, ‘Musing on the Thumb Ring’, JSAA,
vol. 1, 1958, pp. 38-39; W. A. Browne, “The Thumb Ring in An’, FSAA, vol. 2,
1959, pp. 34-37; W. F. Paterson, "Thumb Guards’, 7.544, vol. 6, 1963, pp. 14-15;
W. E. Bishop, ‘On Chinese Archers’ Thumb- rings’, Archery, vol. 26, no. 11,
November 1954, pp. 10-14; G. C. Stone, Glossary of Arms and Armor, New York,
1934 (reprinted 1961), s.v. ‘Archers’ Rings’, pp. 14-17; E. S. Morse,
Bull. Essex Inst., XVIII passim; idem, Additional Notes. -

370
36 |. - SARACEN ARCHERY 2. Drawing with a Ring or Guard


The archer pays great attention to the exactness of his grip upon the string,
for even the smallest variation can affect a shot. The position of the fingers
or the thumb relative to the string is to some extent a matter of personal
preference according to the best results obtained by the individual.

371We shall sec in due course (pp. 51, 55) that the archer is recommended to take
the string in the crease formed by the thumb-joint, or else a fraction either
above or below it towards the tip of the thumb. In any of these positions the
string can lie either straight across the thumb or at a slight angle. Given all
these variations, to say nothing of the relative position of the tip of the
thumb on the middle finger and the forefinger upon the thumb, it can readily be
seen how faults can occur when using a leather guard. The worst fault is Jack of
absolute consistency in even the most minute detail of one's hold or lock upon
the string.

Archers will be aware that a good, clean, and unvarying loose of the string is
difficult to achieve and demands constant practice and attention to
detail. Until this is mastered shooting will be erratic. The importance of this
aspect of shooting cannot be overemphasized.

372With the ring, wide variations do not occur, and it is easier to be
consistent. The two main reasons for this are that the string can rest only in
one position, and the movement of the tip of the thumb across the middle finger
is limited by the lip of the ring. Fence our author's statement that the ring
will be preferred by the inferior archer.

Several years’ experience of shooting with a leather guard permits the view that
it gives its user superior control and that the bowman who has mastered the
technique, will, if shooting for accuracy, outshoot an opponent who is using a
ring. It should, however, be noted that for flight shooting the ring gives a
sharper release and is therefore to be preferred for that purpose.
