# The list of thirty-four points

Wherein Lie the Secrets of Archery As Noted by Certain Great Masters

711
TAn archer does not merit the title and status of master (ustddh) until be is
truly competent and has perfect control over such parts of the body as should be
tensed, relaxed, or still, as the case may be; until he not only has a thorough
knowledge of the faults caused by tensing parts that should be relaxed (tashdid
al-layyin) and relaxing parts that ought to be tensed (talyin al- mushaddad) and
allowing movement where stillness is called for (rahrik as-sákin), but is also
fully acquainted with the injuries an archer can sustain together with their
causes; until he can appreciate differences of stature, the structure of the
limbs, and differences in their length; until he is quite familiar with
techniques that can either make or mar a man’s shooting, and is con- versant
with the differences of opinion held by authorities on these matters. In the
various parts of the body there are thirty-four points to be considered.


Of these, twenty are points of tension:

712
In the right arm there are eight:

1. The little finger; d 2. The ring-finger ; 3. The middle finger; 4. The thumb;

7135. The wrist;*

6. The elbow;

7147. The upper arm;

8. The muscle in the upper part of the forearm.

715
In the left arm there are six:?

. The little finger;

716. The ring-finger;

. The middle finger;

717. The wrist;

. The elbow;

718. The muscle in the lower part of the forearm.


Ata J» UJ) IM Hn

719
In the body there are six:

1. The right flank;

7202. The right shoulder;

3 & 4. Each of the shoulder-blades; 5. The spinal column;

7216. The belly.


III

722
LIZ SARACEN ARCHERY


Eleven are points of relaxation:

723
In the right arm there are two: i. The index finger; 2. The middle sinew of the
forearm.


In the /eft arm there are three:

7241. The index finger;

2. The thumb;

7253. The head of the forearm (i.e. the carpal, or wrist, end of the radius).


In the body there are four: 1. The left shoulder;

7262. The left side;

3. The waist;

7274. The neck.


In the dead there are two: I & 2, The lige.

728
Three are points of stillness: "X. The heart; 2&3. The eyes.


If a state of relaxation supervenes in any point of tension, or a state of
tension in any point of relaxation, the archer will find that certain faults and
injuries‘ follow according to the nature of his error. Thus, if tension at any
point in the left arm is allowed to lapse into relaxation, pain in the palm of
the hand and blistering (‘agr) of the fingers can result. Slashing of the
bow-hand (nfitàg al-qabdah) and distressing contusion of the wrist (taznid)®
arise from the same fault which, apart from causing the bowstring to strike the
wrist, also reduces the range of the arrow.

729Should the thuthb of the left hand be tensed, the proximal phalanx of the thumb
will blister.  If the index finger of this hand is tensed, the arrow will fly
high and miss the mark—a good thing in flight shooting, but thoroughly bad in
target shooting. H the left wrist is relaxed, splitting (shagq) of the skin can
occur between the thumb and index finger as well as blistering of the
arrow-guide formed by the thumb and of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. The
grip of the bow will also turn in the hand, and the bowstring twang to no
purpose. If the left elbow is relaxed, twisting and tremor (irii‘dsh) of the
forearm will result, the length of the draw will be reduced (ie. when the arrow
is supposedly at full draw), and traction will be poor. The left shoulder must
be relaxed, for if it is tensed, it will move upwards, and the bowstring will
strike it.  This results in the arrow’s slapping the arrow-pass (tadmik) "with
consequent deflection!, a wagging arrow (/a'b), or breakage of the shaft at the
fletching,® and causes the string to hit the tip of the thumb of the drawing
hand,

As regards locking, relaxation of any part for which tension has been indicated
can result in broken skin in the locking-fingers’ and a bruise (sawdd) on the
inside of the thumb and cause the String to hit the tip of the thumb of the
drawing hand.

730If the right index finger (shahddah) is tensed, a bruise will come up on the
inside of the thumb, blood wil! collect under the nail, and the nail will
break. Loosing will not be easy, and the string will rap the end of the right
indes finger. If the right wrist is relaxed, pain will pccur there, and traction
will be poor.

Hf the right elbow is relaxed, creeping (zagg) will result, the elbow will drop,
and the arrow fly high (?; the contrary is true) ‘and away from the mark. If the
right upper arm is relaxed, the bowstring may come away from ‘the base of! the
nock,? the shaft will slap the arrow-pass

731
THE LIST OF THIRTY-FOUR POINTS II3


(dimak), the arrow gad at the end of its course, and the bowstring rap the
forearm 'and chest.  If the right shouldcr is relaxed, the length of the draw
will be shortened, accuracy diminished, and the bowstring will rap the chest!.?
Other results will be a sluggish loose (futür al-itlag) and loss of range.

732If the neck is tensed,!? the effect will be tremor. If the lips are tense, there
will be distortion of the archer’s expression. The eyes should be still, for if
they are strained, they will stray and go out of focus. The back must be
straight and firm, for if it is relaxed, stooping Gnhina’) will result, traction
will be poor, the bowstring will rap the chest, and the arrow will gad at the
end of its course. If the left side is tensed, the arrow will fall short, and
traction will be poor. If the belly is relaxed fand allowed to protrude,’ hernia
(infitág) can result. If the waist is tensed, there will be loss of range, the
chest will protrude, and the string catch the archer’s beard. The heart must be
calm, for if it is preoccupied with anything but shooting, the whole operation
will be labour in vain.


COMMENT

733
Points of tension and relaxation are of vital importance to good shooting. The
requirements vary with the archer’s technique, which, in turn, varies with the
purpose to which the bow is put.  The style of shooting known as the zension
method was that of the longbow both in the days when it was still a weapon of
war and long after it had ceased to be such and archery had become a
pastime. The emphasis lay on firmness in all actions and a tight grip on the bow
(Archery (Badminton), Ch. xx, pp. 331-83). With the improvement of bow design a
major change in technique followed the development of modern target bows, and
the relaxed method, in which every possible tension was avoided, became the
vogue. In particular, the archer was to grasp loosely, relax the wrist of his
bow-hand, and keep his knees at ease. In more recent years, however, there has
been a tendency to attach greater importance to tension. A straight wrist, for
instance, is now widely favoured, and archers in general have adopted a
semi-tension method. There are, of course, many individual variations (on which,
see Elmer, Target Archery, pp. 415-21).

Contemporary shooting technique closely approximates to that advocated by
Taybugha. If we except the manner in which the drawing hand is applied to the
string (above, p. xxv), the only major difference—for the present at least—is
the grip on the bow. Pushing the bow away from them with the fork between thumb
and index finger, many archers now shoot with an open hand and wear a strap on
the wrist to prevent the bow from falling as each shot is completed.

734In much the same way as Taybughà, Mustafa Kani furnishes his readers with a list
of thirty- four points requiring tension, relaxation, or stillness, as the case
may be, Although strikingly similar to our author's list, it is by no means
identical with it. It has been adapted to meet the needs of the Ottoman flight
archer who not only used the siper (Fig. 40), but also built up the grip of his
bow with a strip of wax-impregnated linen termed mushamma’ (Klopsteg, pp. 71-73
and his fig. 35). Of these, the first required him to put a slight arch on his
wrist as viewed from the side, while the second provided the additional support
needed by the hand and wrist to main- tain a correct and unvarying grip on the
bow. Understandably, Mustafa Kani takes account of this and other factors and
adapts his list of points accordingly. Two of his details may be singled
out. Firstly, it should be noted that whereas it may be correct for a flight
shooter to hold his jaw well into his left shoulder with neck tensed (Jsi., XV,
p. 236), the same technique would be wholly incorrect in target shooting or on
the battlefield. The second detail worthy of note is that Mustafa Kani extends
his points of stillness to include the lungs. Correct breathing, of which
Taybughà surprisingly says nothing, is a very important point and applies to all
forms of archery.  Its importance was particularly recognized by the Japanese
(Acker, Japanese Archery, pp. 42-48).

The present chapter and the next are closely related. Every archer will have
experienced

735
114 SARACEN ARCHERY


certain inconsistencies developing from some kind of fault or will have
sustained injuries— mostly minor—caused by some error in technique. Although he
may well be aware that his shooting is marred by a fault, he may find it
extremely difficult to determine its nature without the aid of a competent coach
or some other person qualified to subject his every action to technical
scrutiny. It is obviously of great value to the archer who knows that his
technique is defective to be able to check the various possible causes against a
simple list of the kind contained in our treatise. In this way he can be sure
that nothing has been overlooked.

736In Arab Archery, in which seven chapters (xxii-xxviii) are devoted to errors and
their remedies, the subject is handled differently. A specific result of some
fault, such as the string's hitting the forearm, is taken and its possible
causes then discussed. Though perfectly adequate, the treatment is not as
detailed or comprehensive as Taybughà's, and there is little to be gained from
an exhaustive comparison.

The MSS of groups CD offer a slightly different version from that in our
text. The main difference is that the list embraces only thirty-two
points. Taken as a whole, the differences are so slight as to be of little
account.
