# On the archer’s need to recognize his faults and know the correct use of his arms

The right arm is to archery what a leader is to men because it is the source of
all the might and grace of an archer’s shooting. Likewise, it is from this arm
that his shooting derives its effective- ness and penetrative power. It must,
therefore, be carefully watched. His left arm must also receive equal care and
attention since this arm is to archery what a foundation is to a building.  For,
should an archer be ever so meticulous in his care for the right arm, but a
little careless of the left, that small degree of carelessness would vitiate all
his diligence in his care for the right.  Conversely, should he be ever so
meticulous in his care for the left arm and be a little careless of the right,
that small degree of carelessness would, again, vitiate all his diligence in his
care for the left. The reason for this is that if right and wrong are combined,
the result is two wrongs. If the archer, therefore, detects any flaw or failing
in his shooting, he should proceed to set things 1o rights by first examining
his bow and arrows. Should he find in them any imperfection, he should not shoot
with them until he has put them in order. If, on the other hand, he can find
nothing wrong in that direction, he should consider his body and correct
anything that may have gone wrong with it without his realizing.

One thing I have noticed in my own experience! is that some days an archer may
shoot correctly with weapons and limbs alike in perfect shape, and yet, on
others, find there are flaws and not much accuracy in his shooting. Again, on
other days he will find that for no obvious reason he will achieve a higher
standard of accuracy than that which it is in him, or within his usual power, to
attain. ‘I have gone into this point and often asked experts in archery, doctors
of theology!? and sages to tell me the reason for this, but have never had any
explanation apart from that given me by a certain saintly person who observed,
‘Don’t you know that there are two kinds of day to Fate—one that is for you, and
one that is against you?’ I praised God and thanked the man for his explanation.

837Overmuch shooting can sometimes stupefy an archer. What happens is that he goes
on shooting for days without taking a single day off and then finds himself
befuddled by it. He tries hard to achieve accuracy, but fails because he has
used his limbs so much that fatigue and stiffness have set in, and he is
overcome by a kind of boredom and irritation caused by a surfeit of shooting.
For this malady I have never known any remedy other than shooting at neither
target nor mark.  What the archer should do in this case is to stand on a high
place and shoot into the air, giving his eye and mind to what he is doing with
his arms and not to any particular target. If he can take up flight shooting and
compete with himself for distance, he will find it the best possible cure.  He
should carry on doing this for some days until he recovers his ability to aim,
regains his accuracy, and gets rid of his mental confusion without any loss of
practice, This piece of advice is an excellent tip for an archer who applies
himself assiduously to target shooting. The best way, in fact, for a target
shooter to practise is for him to shoot and rest on alternate days, for if he
does so, he will not become dazed, fatigued, or bored, and he will continually
improve in everything on which he expends his energies.


136

838
British Museum, Add. 24489, fol, va


PLATE ONE Ornamental Bookplate.  The inscription inside the medallion indicates
that this

839
rane Af IT ache AT nue ls Gen ee ett ^



840

PLATE FOUR

841



842British Museum, 152076-1770(32


Portrait of Hulagu.  Detail from Persian miniature, early sixteenth century.
Note length of bow and slight reflex in grip.

843



844


Pd s

845
P) ATES FIVE (below) Arrowheads.  A variety contained in a single quiver from
[ndia. The crescent heads were intended for shooting birds on the wing and were
also used against unprotected troops. The blunt,


& six (above)

846
conical heads were used in hunting birds and small animals in trees.  Note the
armour-piercing yaghlig on the left-hand side (fourth from



847



848
bottom).


Bowstring Loop Knots

849
Top: A massive Mon; bowstring for a very h bow made from a thin of a hemp-like
vegetat fibre.


Centre: Sino-Tatar bo string made from rami with separate end loop Where the
knots rest í the string-bridges the string is bound with tl silver wire.

850
Bottom: String from

Northern India. The 1 skein is made from ni strands of twisted gut the separate
end loops fone only shown! are’

851



852



853British Museum (Natural History) ATE SEVEN A. Thumb-rings.  ; Turkish—nephrite
Persian—carnelian


Turkish—jasper Moghui—mocca stone

854
Persian—agate


Britigh Alusetm TE SEVEN B Thumb-tings. : ove: Moghui—ornamentai Chinese—jade
Moghul—ornamental white jade with jewels white jade, rubies and in gold inlay.

855
emeralds in gold inlay.


NISL tem

856
British Museum


The Draw of ‘69° and the Grip of *30".

857Lokapala, or tomb figure, of eighth century from China shows how widespread were
the


techniques of the Eastern archers.

858



859Reconstruction to show possible original appearance.



860

From a Private Colle.

861
PLATE NINEA & B. Gold Finger-tips.  Phoenician, c. fifth century 8.c. The
Phoenicians used


a two-finger draw, similar to what is now called the

862
Flemish loose. The holes around the base suggest they were stitched to a glove
or to thongs that led to a wrist strap. There is controversy over the use of
these articles.



863



864
PLATE TEN The Sasanid Khusraw Nushirvin Displaying

his Prowess.

865Persian miniature, c. A.D. 1300, from a copy of the Shah Nameh,


PLATE ELEVEN Mounted Archers Engaging Defenders on a Wall.

866Detail from MS Arab 161, fol. r12v, A.D. 1307-8.

Now knotted reins in front of sai tlo

867



868PLATE TWELVE Mounted Archer.  Detail from the battle between Alexander and
Darius.  Herat 1525. (Gift of Alexander Smith Cochran.) Note



869



870
Topkapi Mriewn H,


PLATE THIRTEEN Sultan Murad I] Shooting at the Qabag.  From MS dated between
1579 and 1585.

871



872



873



874
p anoo MY POF PPA Sp Moy Be a hee ola o ae Were, Eo onde | Ws orsi Ned o Usb V
eat



875

dHibtorirgsue Nanosa. MS Ar. oboe. 7 rete PLATE FOURTEEN Mounted Archers, The
right-hand archer is usine the hunak? rechniaue.

876



877Biblioteca Comunale Palermo


PLATE FIFTERN Georgians Shooting at the Mast.  From the original drawing by
Father Castelli, c. 1630.

878



879


Brush Afrenius. Add, 774, fol. 00;

880
PLATE SIXTEEN Archers Attacking a Fort.  Note positions of the draw. Two
archers, lower right



881



882

Lugo. Siman Collection, Mamchestor Museum

883
PLATE SEVENTEEN Korean Arrow-guide.  Note holes for attaching a thong in the
rear end.


j

884
PLATE EIGHTEEN



885



886
Reproduction of the ‘Superb’ by Edward McEwen.  t. The unbraced how >
Strung. x. At full draw of
