According to traditional teaching propounded both by Turks well-versed in our
subject and by horsemen trained in the art of mounted combat,!* shooting as
practised by horse-archers falls into two main classes, namely, that known as
‘shooting at a slant’ syighaj; gigaj; see Glossary) wherein the archer directs
his shot downwards, and that known as 'gourd-shooting' (gabag) wherein he shoots
up into the sky (below, pp. 77-78). Both classes are fundamentally alike in that
each requires the rider first to come to a canter in which he gradually builds
up the speed of his mount, next to put it to a gallop, and then after shooting
to turn off at the end of the course.  The arrow is shot at full gallop, or, in
other words, after the horse has attained full stride and is in mid-career,
After the arrow has been discharged the horse should continue its gallop ‘to the
end of the field!.*

528
si


In either type of shooting it is essential first to gain a sound knowledge of
equitation, to acquire practice and skill with horses, to ride them in attack
and retreat, to learn to control a horse's head with the bridle, and so on,
until finally the rider is thoroughly accustomed to such details, and they
become a matter of habit to him. All this constitutes a highly important skill
which must be acquired by every horseman, particularly the Mameluke trooper, The
technique js best learned from masters in the art of lancing, for they have a
greater knowledge and ex- perience of these things than anyone else. It is from
such mentors that one learns the art of thrusting and parrying with the lance as
well as the technique of wielding the mace, sword play, and so on. Those who
attain perfection in such matters will have attained perfection in the art and
manners of the mounted warrior.*

529A combination of all these skills has only ever been brought to full perfection
in the case of certain Turks in Islam (the Bahri Mamelukes?) and those mounted
champions of religion, the Companions of the Prophet.* To their innate skill in
the art of mounted combat such men added a skill and valour in faith, witness,
and religious certitude together with a readiness to sacrifice their lives for
the love of God and the sake of His good pleasure as well as love of His
Messenger, Muhammad.* No nation ever offered them resistance nor was there ever
any nation with which they waged war but they buried it, humbled it, or took it
by the forelock. With succeeding generations, however, the bonds which had held
their predecessors together weakened as a result of disintegration, lack of
cohesion, and a paucity of entrants ‘for military training of the kind
described!, When this happened, they were overtaken by weakness and debility
commen- surate with the loss of solidarity they had sustained .

The horse-archer should contro! his horse’s head i a martingale (sirifsar) and
fit an ‘aid?  (musta'àn) to hold the reins in place. The martingale is a
familiar piece of equipment, the

530
7I


72 | SARACEN ARCHERY

531
purpose of which is to control the head of a horse whose neck is poorly bent to
the bridle, The need for it arises because a mount of this kind, when pressed by
its rider, will put its head down and toss it up and, in consequence, gallop
uncollectedly. It is therefore liable either to fall or strike its rider ‘in the
chest?” with its head. This, then, is why a mount whose neck is not properly
bent to the bridle must be equipped with a i

Our second item, the aid, is a folded strap fitted to the end of the rezns to
enable the rider to keep them securely in his right hand. It should be fitted
under the knot that fastens the reins together at the top, and a second knot
tied in the reins to limit the movement of the horse’s head when necessary. This
second knot will be quite familiar to cavalrymen and equetries® from its use on
the polo field. The pommel, which goes in between the reins, should lie below
the second knot (i.e. the reins as shortened by the second knot may be slipped
over the pommel, .  which will keep them in place and hold the horse's head).” 3
|

532Because of the harassing discomforts it may cause, the mace should be placed
beneath the — stirrup-leather to prevent it from shifting about. The mace is
familiar enough to require no com- ment, There are certain horsemen, however,
who are ignorant of the techniques of the cavalryman, and, when such a one
gallops his horse, his mace shifts about beneath his thigh and works its way
out, with the result that it either hampers the rider or drops off. The proper
procedure in this case is for the rider to secure the shaft of his mace well in
beneath the leather so as to allow it no freedom of movement whatever. Although
this is all commonplace so far as the instructed are concerned, it is not so
with the majority of people. The point must therefore be mentioned because the
purpose of manuals is to instruct the ignorant and to remind the conversant of
what they may have forgotten or overlooked.

The aid should be secured to the right hand by means of a ‘retainer’ (mahbas) on
the ring-finger.  This item is fastened to the aid by a thin thong and serves to
attach the aid to the ring-finger to prevent it from slipping from its grasp
when shooting. This operation should be carried out after mounting. (See Plate
12.)

533In sitting 2 horse it is of fundamental importance for the rider to sit erect in
the middle of its back and then to lean forward slightly as he breaks into a
canter (or, according to another version, "to sit up straight at the canter and
then to lean forward slightly as he puts his mount to full gallop’). The
inclination should be such that it is imperceptible; it is only a slight
inclination accompanying a forward rise as the knees are pressed in firmly to
grip the horse.

The length of the stirrup is determined by the length of the rider’s leg, for
horsemen differ in size, and each man has his own particular length. The stirrup
must be made to fit the leg and be neither too long nor too short, but, as has
been proved by experience, correspond exactly to the length of the leg. What the
rider should do is to sit erect in the centre of the saddle, slip his fest from
the stirrups, let them hang down, and look at their position. If the bottom edge
of the stirrup touches the inner ankle-bone, the heel of the foot being always
lower than the stirrup, this will give the correct measurement. If the edge is
higher or lower, it should be lengthened or shortened accordingly until it is of
the appropriate length. This is an important and well- respected principle which
it will be profitable to observe.

534To lodge the little toes in the stirrup, they should be pressed against the
outer support of the latter, the outer being the opposite of the inner which
lies next to the animal. The foot itself should be pressed down in a horizontal
position. In other words, no part of the foot, whether toes or heel, should
point upwards or downwards. On the contrary, both toes and heel should be on the
same level and be held firmly in position—though there is something to be said
for having the heel dip slightly from the stirrup towards the ground. The foot
should not be brought so close to the horse’s flank as to touch it, but rather
held a little way away from it. It should not, however, be too far out from the
animal's flank, but as close as it may be without actually touching it, except
when the mount is given the heel; The knees and calves, on the other hand,
should be held well into the animal. When kicking the horse's flank with the
spur, the position of the latter


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 73

535
should be a span or less away from the site of the girth. It should be no
further away than | that, otherwise it is a fault in the eyes of the cavairyman.


iii

536
Holding the reins with middle finger and ring-finger, the archer should grasp
the bow with the whole hand. In other words, he should set the whole of his palm
and his fingers to the handle of his bow and, using only the middle finger and
ring-finger of the same hand, hold the reins in the middle until the moment he
draws ‘so that he can nock!.!* Once he is at the draw, it makes no difference
whether the reins are slipped or not.

When charging, he stands in the stirrups and leans forward ever so slightly,
taking care not to lean over too far. It is a half, and not a full, standing
position that is required as the rider rises in his stirrups. In precise terms,
he should stand in this manner and lean forward slightly over the saddle-bow,
bending his waist over a little so as to set his navel on it.

537In grasping the arrow it is of fundamental importance for the archer to take it
up with the whole of his hand and all fingers as he would a stave. Its nock
should be pointing to his rear and its head - to his fore, and the shaft held in
his grasp st a point two-thirds of its length away from the head. After grasping
the arrow in this way he nocks, setting it on the string with the three
appropriate fingers in the usual way as described earlier (above, p. 47). When
the arrow is nocked, its head should occupy a position between the horse's ears,
but above the animal’s head without catching it at all.

Kicking the horse into the charge, nocking the arrow, drawing the bow!? with the
arrow in place, and slipping the rein from the left hand should all be carried
out after the manner of a single operation. The charger by this time should be
in full carcer, and, as soon as the archer has completed the sequence of
operations just described, he should hold himself fat the draw"?  as still as
some bird that stills its wings in flight and holds them motionless, such as the
vulture, eagle, or the like. To put the matter plainly, he should move the bow
neither up nor down with his left forearm, The same rule applies to his right
arm. In other words, both arms should be kept in the same plane as his horse
continues to charge as fast as it possibly can.

538A point that should have been made is this: lest the horse flag at the gallop
and need to be whipped, the rider should be equipped with a switch that can be
secured to the ring-finger of his right hand along with the aid that is holding
the reins. This he can then use to whip up his flagging charger before taking up
his arrow "in full career! !* and executing the subsequent opera- tions as
already described.

To return to the point which we left.! When once he has drawn the bow ‘and
brought his arrow to full draw!!5 he should hold himself as still as some bird
such as a vulture or eagle—for both these birds soar in the air without any
movement of the wings—until he reaches the mark.  When he draws level with the
latter and his left stirrup comes a little in front of it, he should release the
arrow and gracefully follow through with the appropriate thrust (khaprah)
(above, p.  68) as he combines elegant dexterity unmarred by clumsiness with
deliberate movement and a clean loosc.!*

539
iv


There are many ways of shooting an arrow from horseback. Of these, we deem
seventeen to be the right number, but the rule we pass on from our master
archers (ustadin) is that there are ten, and because the masters are agreed on
these ten we take them to be primary, the rest being secondary, whose number
might be increased. (On the problematical question of classification as raised
by the account that now follows, see p. 80.) : :

540To begin with, the archer may shoot downwards to the left parallel to his left
thigh. This is, as we have already said, what is termed ‘shooting at the slant’,
the same type of shot in an upward


74 ^ SARACEN ARCHERY direction being called *gourd-shooting'. There is a third
way of shooting which lies between these two (i.e. shooting horizontally). i 2

541if the archer ‘charges with the intention of shooting, but!!? does not succeed
in making his $hot in the manner described, either because he has been too slow
in nocking or for any other reason, he should not loose his arrow, If it is
merely a matter of his overshooting the mark with his horse, he should continue
in his charge, all the while spurring his mount. Having drawn the bow, he should
then ease it down without loosing, for archers account a mistimed loose a fault,

The archer may turn his chest to the right and, in so doing, skilfully incline
his hand to cant the upper limb of the bow, which is the top half!* and called
the ‘shooting limb’, above the animal’s neck. "^! By adopting the position
described he can shoot an arrow that is fully effective against anyone in front
of him either at short range or long.*** It is the horse that imposes the
necessity of the procedure indicated, for should the archer shoot without
canting the bow, its lower limb will strike the animal,

542If he so wishes, the archer may, once the bow is drawn and the arrow at full
draw, deftly

bring the lower limb of his bow over the horse’s back to his right side.*"*
Then, after holding at full draw for a moment or 50** and resting before
release, let him shoot by the shoulder of his horse. ! " By turning his chest to
the left with a skilful and gentle twist from the waist, which should be brought
round in a relaxed movement that is both graceful and effortless, and then
drawing and canting his bow above the horse’s croup,** the archer can shoot to
his rear (i.c. from the left with his bow aslant). Should he wish to shoot to
the rear, but in a manner different from that just described, he should point
the top of his bow upwards, keeping its leg to the ground and slightly away from
the flank of his charger so that he will not strike the animal when he releases
the arrow (i.e. from the left with his bow upright).

543Both methods which have been described as suitable for shooting to the rear may
be used whether the target be high, as in gourd-shooting, or low, as in shooting
at the slant. There are



544

Fic, 27. SHOOTING REARWARDS FROM HORSEBACK ~ Note reins and switch in right
hand. à; From a fifteenth-century miniature, Topkapı Saray: Müzesi, 2163,
Istanbul,

545
ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 75


then, four kinds of shot: two for shooting at the slant and two for
gourd-shooting.*** There is also the possibility of two other kinds of shot from
the right of the horse’s croup? "above the right thigh?,** but to shoot in this
way is difficult.

546Should the archer prefer another method, he may, after drawing the bow and
holding at full draw in the usual way, bring his right hand up over his head and
then, tucking the latter in beneath his right forearm so that his hand lodges in
the hollow in the nape of his neck, shoot - (to his rear) hard by his horse’s
thigh, either to right or left of it. Should he wish to adopt this technique for
shooting forwards, he should, after drawing and holding, carefully bring in his
bow-hand over the neck of the horse and shoot downwards in front of the right
knee. This type of shooting, which can be used either on the right flank of the
horse or the left, is termed jarmaki by archers and also admits of four kinds of
shot (see end of next paragraph and Plate 14).

If one wishes "to use this technique in another way!*" the bow should be turned
around so that the string comes into immediate contact with the back of the left
forearm outside the body.  This should be done before drawing the bow. The
archer's next step is to draw from behind him in the manner described after
first nocking the arrow, What he does is first to place his left forearm behind
the hollow in the nape of the neck between head and neck.*** Next, he nocks the
arrow, locks, draws, and then, using the four kinds of shot already described,
shoots from behind from the nape of his neck—the four kinds of shot being two to
the fore of the archer and two to his rear,

547Finally, the archer may shoot anyone he likes from beneath his horse’s neck, on
either the right side or the left, provided he is shooting at short range. This
brings us to the last of the various methods of shooting from horseback. What
the archer should do here is to draw his bow with the arrow and hold. He should
then twist his left arm and shoot beneath his horse's neck from one side to the
other. This technique imposes upon him the necessity of discarding bis horse's??
martingale and leaning over somewhat at an angle. ‘This requires long
practice.159

With these two methods of shooting the number of the ten basic ways in which an
arrow may be shot from horseback is complete. There is, however, no restriction
upon the limit to which the forms of shooting may go, for they are governed only
by men’s aspirations, by their skill in the techniques of mounted combat, by the
extent of their intelligence and acumen, and by their manual dexterity, Each
archer, therefore, may add to his repertoire as he wishes.

548After discharging the arrow at the target in any of the aforementioned ways, the
bow should be cast down from the fist on to the left forearm or upper arm. The
string should be on the outside, that is to say, towards the archer's back. The
left arm should be inside between the bow and the string. The bow will then be
suspended on the archer's forearm and his hand left free to take up the reins
again.

All the various forms of mounted archery which have been mentioned should be
executed at the charge, with the horse all the while at full gallop. There
should be no slackening of pace, even after the loose, until the horse reaches
the end of the field. To put it plainly, the rider should continue to press his
mount after casting his bow on to his forearm.!! The horse should finally swerve
off to the left at the end of the field.

549
y


As regards procedure and rules there is no difference between gourd-shooting and
shooting at the slant, for it has already been explained that the two are
essentially the same, the only real . difference being that in the one the
direction is downward, whereas in the other it is upward. In gourd shooting the
best way to shoot is for the archer to look upwards over his mount’s croup
. when he is just beyond the mast (khashabak).?? His best policy is to follow
the arrow with his gaze until it has passed beyond (sic) the mark. To follow the
arrow to its target applies to both . types of shooting fand indeed to all types
of árchery!.**

550
76 SARACEN ARCHERY


: A point to be stressed here is that when archers meet for the purpose of
engaging ineitherof the ‘two exercises and one of them begins to charge and
start shooting, a second party should not come in behind until he is a good
distance away from him so that, should the first by any chance fall, he, the
second, will be able to turn his horse away to avoid coming down on top of him,
Another point to remember is that the archer should not retrieve his arrow until
all the shooting is over... .

551The field should have an even surface and, for the horse, be in fit condition
underfoot. If one side of the field is higher than the other, the charge must
follow the sscent. Furthermore, a crosswind blowing from one side of the field
to the other is what is required. If, however, there is a direct wind, then it
should be behind the archer as he makes his charge.

In gourd-shooting the archer should beware of his horse’s bumping into the mast
and for this reason keep a man’s arm-span between his horse and the mast. The
closer the archer is to the mast, the better and more skilful his shooting must
be. Great caution must, however, be exercised in this respect because when the
archer is engaged in shooting and slips his horse’s reins, his mount is liable
to swerve towards the mast and collide with it with fatal results to both horse
and rider. I personally have seen with my own eyes a skilful archer belonging to
the company of His Excellency, the late Azdamur (Ozdemir) the Treasurer, Viceroy
of.Tripoli,** whose Amir of the Hunt** he was, experience such a mishap on a
public holiday in the city of Tripoli in Syria.  He shot at the gourd and was
proclaimed by the onlookers. Then, even as he was shooting and priding himself
on the crowd’s applause, he took his mind off his horse, and it collided with
the mast. As a result of the accident he died that same day as also did his
horse.

552Everyone, therefore, who practises archery on horseback should see to it that he
does not shoot from an untried horse. Indeed, his very first steps should be to
try out his horse without engaging in archery. He should introduce it to the
‘gourd’ and the ‘slant’ while riding at walking pace without at any time putting
it to the charge and do this several times, so that it may get to know both
kinds of shooting and not take fright and shy when confronted with them. At the
next stage he should put his horse to the charge as he would in actual shooting
without, however, at this juncture, actually shooting. "The purpose of this is
to accustom his horse to continue its gallop after the reins have been dropped
from the hand.1*7 When he finds that his horse can make 2 good entry and
approach, displaying no faults and being sure-footed, be may thereafter shoot at
his pleasure.

Should an archer wish to avoid the risk of bumping into the mast, he should
stretch a rope across the field between two masts and attach the gourd to the
middle of the rope. He can then charge, pursuing a completely unobstructed
course under the gourd. It is a much better policy - to erect two such masts
rather than one, especially for novices, so as to protect them from this - great
hazard, — —

553If horse-archers happen to be out in the open country and wish to practise
gourd-shooting, but : can obtain neither masts nor rope with which to erect the
target, a circle should be marked on a stretch of flat terrain?! with a diameter
of about 1o arm-spans (22 yards). They can then charge and, upon reaching the
centre (i.e. area) of the circle, shoot up into the sky. Any arrow that comes
down again in the centre of the circle can be considered accurately shot, for
this circle will be the equivalent of a gourd or the same as a target. Indeed
this practice calls for more precise shooting and is far less dangerous than the
true method.1 I have heard it said that any archer who, upon shooting, bends his
arms behind him a little will rarely miss the circle. You may also fix up a hoop
on a spear like the birfas (see Comment) and shoot at that,


vi

554
The field should be divided into three sections and the mark placed at the end
of the second.  To achieve success and a proficient performance, the archer
should begin by cantering over the


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 77

555
first third of the field arid then give the horse its head as he prepares to
perform in the manner already described (or, another version: ‘So that he can
nock*! and perform proficiently, the archer should canter from the start over
the first third of the field, charge over the second, shoot at the target, and
finally continue his charge to the end of the third.’**), The shorter the range
to be traversed by the archer, the more skilful his shooting must be. The longer
the field, the casier it will be for the novice. They say that the maximum
length of a field should be a distance of 130? arm-spans (about 284 yards) and
the minimum 60 (about 131 yards).

For best results in shooting at the slant the archer should swing ground to his
rear and shoot at tbe mark by the animal's left thigh. In this class of
shooting, furthermore, he should override the mast by one arm-span and then
shoot in the turning position.

556For shooting at the slant he should also use an arrow with a slim head, such as
the butt head (amdjiyyah), and not a yásij arrow (broadhead?), for the latter
may sever the arrows of his col- leagues (already in the target) and even do his
colleagues themselves some harm. The best arrow for gourd shooting is the
"small, light! cylinder type.


COMMENT

557
The foregoing chapter may well be considered the most important part of our
book, for although there is no lack of eye-witness accounts of the oriental
horse-archer’s skill and pro- ficiency, we know of no record of his techniques
that is as detailed and instructive as that of


Taybughi.

558In MSS of the CD groups the chapter is prefaced with some brief but informative
observations on mounted archery (C, 77b—78a; C*, 1215-1232; and D!, 52b-53a; D*,
76a-b, respectively C and D, in which the accounts are similar but not
identical). Not surprisingly, the Turks and Turkmens (C), or the "Furkmens and
Mongols (D) are named as the principal exponents from whom the horse-archers of
the Middle East acquired their skills.


1. Qabag and Qighaj |

559. (2) Qabag. From the discussion in Appendix 6 it will be seen that this word
denotes (i) a gourd proper; (ii) a gourd transformed into a pigeon-container and
used as a target for horse- archers; (iii) an artificial gourd fashioned out of
a precious metal and serving the same purpose as the preceding; (iv) a mast
surmounted by any of the preceding; (v) in conjunction with the word ‘shooting’,
shooting from horseback (or otherwise?) at an elevated target.

In our text ít is natural to assume that for everyday purposes the mark was an
ordinary gourd.  It cannot, however, be taken for granted that the latter
sufficed for ceremonial occasions, for we know from more than one source that it
was a practice of Mameluke rulers to transform gourds into containers for
pigeons or doves. At festivals and on high days and holidays horse-archers would
vie with one another to prove their marksmanship by freeing the birds from their
mast-top prisons (D). If the ‘gourd’ was of gold or silver, the successful
competitor would be awarded his tatget together with a robe of honour (Appendix
6).

560Something of the history of this exercise in Mameluke times has been outlined by
D. Ayalon (below, p. 78.) According to this scholar, the sport enjoyed great
popularity during the first Mameluke period (A.D. 1250-1382) and was in its
heyday in the sultanates of Baybars I, Qalaün and al-Ashraf Khalil, i.e. from
1260 to 1295. It was often performed on a grand scale with much pomp and
ceremonial at the births and circumcisions of the sons of the sultans or grand
amirs.  In the Circassian period (1382-1517), on the other hand, its popularity
appears to have waned, and references to it in contemporary sources are scarce.

Although there is every reason to suppose that the exercise was introduced to
the Middle

561
78 SARACEN ARCHERY


East from Central Asia where it was practised by the Turkmens (C, D), its
origins cannot be traced from written sources. We, for our part, venture the
hypothesis that it arose from the need to hunt birds from horseback. Birds of
the right size and kind would be required not only for food, but also for
feathers with which to make and repair arrows, and we may well believe the
Chinese poet’s assertion that ‘Tartar chieftains shoot so well that the birds
are afraid to fiy’ (Chinese Poems, tr. A. Waley, p, 128). If acceptable, the
hypothesis may be pressed a stage further with the suggestion that a pole
surmounted by a suitable target, perhaps a bundle of rags, would be erected near
a nomad encampment so that boys might be taught the fundamentals of the art, and
others afforded a valuable means of practice and amusement. Proficiency in
archery can be achieved only by constant practice, and some kind of facility,
however crude, must surely have been devised from the earliest times.

562From a purely military angle the main purpose of ‘gourd’ shooting must have lain
in its useful- ness as a means of developing the skill and agility of the
horse-archer. Some impression of the dexterity attainable may be formed from a
text to which Ayalon draws attention (Scripza, Pp. 55-56). In 1293, so we are
told, Amir Badr ad-Din al-Baysari devised a saddle with a very low back (that of
the normal saddle would be raised; cf. Plate 14) which he used for the gourd-
shooting event at one of the big festivals of the year. When he drew level with
the mast and then, contrary to normal practice, passed it without having made
his shot, it was thought he had lost his opportunity to shoot, but suddenly he
leaned right back with his head on the horse’s rump and, shooting from a supine
position, hit and broke the gourd.

The purpose of the sport is explained by Busbecq in the following terms:

563
“They [Turks of the sixteenth century] have a Custom derived from the Parthians,
that they counterfeit flying away on Horseback and presently turn back and kill
their unwary Pursuers.  The way they learn to do it, is this: They erect an High
Pole, almost in plain Ground, with a Brass globe atop of it; about this they
spur their Horses, and having got a little beyand, the Horse still Galloping,
they presently turn about, and flying along, shoot an Arrow into that Globe. The
frequent use hereof makes them to expect, that their Bow being turned in their
flight, their unwary Enemy is shot through." (Embassy into Turkey, London, 1694,
pp. 210-11.)


In Persia the Maydan-i Shah in Isfahan seems to have been an important centre
for this kind of sport, for we have more than one account of the dexterity of
the archers there. A French Huguenot traveller of the seventeenth century
writes:

564
‘In the midst of the piazza stands a kind of May-Pole, or Mast of a Ship, where
the People exercise Shooting at Birds. When the King comes to shoot, they set a
Cup of Gold upon the top of the Mast, which he is to strike down with an
Arrow. To which purpose he must ride full speed, nor is he permitted to shoot
till he has past the May-Pole, rurning himself upon the crupper of his Horse
. . . The Cup belongs to him that strikes it down; and I have seen Sha-
Seft...in five Courses strike down three Cups...’ (Quoted by E. Crawshay
Williams, fom Persia, London, 1907, pp. 281-82. For a similar account, see Sir
John Chardin’s Travels, » p. 200.)


With variations in the nature of the target (melon, arpus, apple, trencher
filled with small Silver coin, criminals under death sentence, heads of rebels,
etc.) the game is frequently men- tioned by European travellers, The height of
the mast probably varied, but it is given by one writer as ‘some twenty-five
feer’. (F. B. Bradley-Birt, Through Persia from the Gulf to the Caspian, London,
1909, pp. 266-67.)

565(b) Qighaj. In the present context this term (see Appendix 6) may denote: (i) an
exercise in which an archer, shooting parallel with his left thigh, directs his
shot at a ground target; (ii) any kind of shooting from horseback in which the
target is so situated as to require the archer to shoot downwards; (iii) the
target at which either of the preceding is directed.


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 79

566
Nothingissaidin our textabout the nature of the mark, but the view that it may
have been a butt made of a wicker basket filled with sand (below, p. 173) is not
unreasonable. The possibility that the term gighaj denoted other targets of a
similar kind should not, however, be excluded. Hansard.  __without an accurate
reference-—quotes an eye-witness account of a display outside Cairo in the
sixteenth (?) century which records that ‘on one side were three artificial
hillocks of sand, about fifty paces distant one from the other, and on the
summit of cach stood a spear and a banner, being marks destined for the archers’
(Book of Archery, pp. 34-36). Busbecq describes an ordinary Turkish butt as
being a bank of sandy, gravelly earth, four feet from the ground and formed with
boards (op. cit., p. 206). (See also Plate IO.)

Although Taybughà makes no direct reference to the range at which the target was
engaged in the gighaj exercise (sense (i) above), an archer shooting parallel
with his left thigh and half standing in his stirrups with a slight forward lean
would, we suggest, have had his mark almost directly beneath his left knee at
the moment of loosing. The practical value of this form of shoot- ing is
obvious, and it is almost otiose to point out its direct relevance to hunting
and warfare.  From a military standpoint the ability to engage an awkwardly
situated ground target would be an essential qualification in a horse-archer. It
is easy to envisage a situation, for instance, in which the mounted warrior in
the heat of battle suddenly comes at full tilt upon an enemy, perhaps just
unhorsed and either lying on the ground or in the act of rising lmost beneath
the hooves of the onrushing horse, With a loaded bow and no time to switch to
sword or mace the man on horseback could only dispatch his foe with a quick shot
at an awkward angle. The essential purpose of gighaj shooting, therefore, would
certainly be to train archers to kill under every possible condition in combat.

567Between the rwo forms of shooting, gighaj and gabag, there was, so Taybughá
tells us, a third, by which, assuming that the first two are directed almost
vertically downward and upward, he must mean shooting in a horizontal, or nearly
horizontal, plane. The classification is not a pedantic superfluity, for,
whereas considerable contortion is needed to be able to shoot either almost
directly downwards or upwards, the body is tolerably erect when the shooting is
horizontal.  If an archer could shoot accurately both upwards and downwards, any
shot that was roughly horizontal would have seemed relatively simple.


2. Reins and Accoutrements

568
(a) Sirifsar, ‘martingale’. The word is undoubtedly a borrowing from the Persian
sar-afsár, which is nebulously explained in Persian dictionaries as a kind of
headstall, or as the head of the reins, meaning that part which is taken into
the hands, and so on (e.g. Farhang-i Nafisi and Steingass, s.v.), In our text we
have an unambiguous definition. On the other hand, we are not told exactly what
kind of martingale was used for the purpose in question. Under certain condi-
tions in which a horse might stumble, a running martingale will allow the animal
to lift its head sufficiently to recover its balance, whereas a standing
martingale could be a serious impediment.  The need for a martingale was
evidently considered by some to be a particularly bad fault in à horse-archer's
mount (C1, 78b; C^, 1243).

After examining a large number of miniature paintings we have found only one
certain depiction of a martingale for the fourteenth century (A. Sakisian, La
miniature persane, Paris, 1929, Fig. 31, p. xxii École Mongole, commencement du
xive siècle}. This, like those daung from about the sixteenth century, presents
the appearance of a standing martingale.

569(b) Musta'án, ‘aid’. This is a technical term which, in the sense it has in our
text, is not recorded in any Arabic dictionary known to us. The translation we
adopt is based on a literal rendering, viz. ‘that to which recourse is had for
help’. According to one definition, the aid was a fine leather strap which was
about two spans long—presumably when folded, though it is by no means certain
that it was always a loop as indicated in our text. It was used by some archers,
but not


So SAKACEN ARCHERY

570
others, according to personal preference (C1, 79a; C$, 1242-b). Leather, it
would seem, was not an essential material; cord would do equally well (B, et
ai.).

(c) Mahbas, ‘retainer’, According to our text this item was worn on the
ring-finger to enable the archer to retain his reins while shooting. It is,
perhaps, not commonly realized that control ofa horse is virtually lost when the
reins are dropped. It has been modern cavalry practice to train the horse to
follow a straight course under these circumstances, and there would seem to be
cvery reason to suppose that mounted warriors in past ages would adopt the same
policy. To regain control the archer must recover his reins as rapidly as
possible.

571While it is clear from our various MSS that the ‘retainer’ was a ring of some
kind, there are

ifferences of detail in the definitions given. According to one explanation, it
was both (i) a ring tied into the reins beneath the rein-knot, presumably to
accommodate the aid, and (ii) a ring used for the purpose described in our text
(Ct, 79b; C?, 125b; cf. D1, 54b; D4, 77b). Elsewhere it is defined as a ring
designed to slip over the top end of the loop formed by the aid to make a
smaller loop which would accommodate the ting-finger (a, sra).

572
3. Forms of Shooting from Horseback


From the text, as it stands, it is not easy to discern which are the ten forms
of shooting ftom horseback declared to be basic, or to conjecture with any hope
of certainty which are the seven- teen of our author, The matter is further
complicated by the fact that in the MSS of groups C

573
Is a form basic because of the direction in which a shot can be made? In other
words, is it basic because it is vital to the attainment of the maximum field
within which the archer can effectively operate? Or is it basic because of
technique and posture? Or, finally, is it basic by reason of 2 combination of
all such factors,

While it is not intended to embark upon an unprofitable enumeration of
classifications that may be developed on the foundations implied by our
questions, it is at the same time appropriate to point out that direction does
not always demand a fundamental change in posture. In certain situations the
archer’s posture may remain virtually unchanged even though the directions in

574
not shoot the gourd while sitting upright in his saddle by merely raising the
bow-hand above his head. On the other hand, to shoot downwards at long range
would not require a posture funda- mentally different from that used for
shooting in a roughly horizontal plane.

To those for whom esoteric interpretations have no appeal one solution that may
commend itself is as follows:

575
- To left flank, forward and downward parallel with thigh (gighaj),

. To left flank, forward and upward (qabaq).

576- In horizontal plane (target roughly level with left shoulder).

. Ahead with bow, upper limb to right, canted above horse’s neck.

577- To right flank, forward and downward.

- To left flank rear, upward or downward, with bow canted over horsc's croup.
- Fo left flank rear, upward or downward, with bow vertical.

578. Jarmaki of two kinds, each with four shots.

. Beneath horse's neck from right to left.

579- Beneath horse’s neck from left to right.


OW waxy Ate Bu Nox

580
-


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 81

581
Shots 6 and 7 executed on the right-hand side may reasonably be discounted
either as variations or as forms of shooting too difficult to be considered
basic. Unless the shooter was ambidexterous —and nowhere is there any suggestion
that horse-archers were trained to be so—such shots would certainly be most
difficult. For possible alternatives to 8, 9, and 10, see J. D. Latham, ‘Notes
on Mamlük Horse-archers', in BSOAS XXXII, 1969, pp. 265-66.

For the sake of comparison, which will afford the reader an opportunity of
evaluating additional or discrepant details contained in them (italicized
below), we have thought it worth while to précis in the following composite
account the versions contained in groups C and D (C3, 83b- 86b; C, 131b-136b;
D!, 58a-60b; D*, 79b-81b; portions occurring in D, but not in C, are indicated
in parentheses):

582The ways in which an arrow may be shot amount to fifteen and have to do more
particularly with shooting at a ground target (gighaj). An archer may shoot
downwards parallel with his



583

Fic, 28, SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK Schematic operational field viewed from above.

584
82 SARACEN ARCHERY


left thigh—this is gighas—or upwards, which kind of shooting is called gabag
. . . The rider may turn his chest to the right, canting the upper limb of his
bow across the horse's neck with the arrowhead above its right ear. The bow may
also be canted with the lower limb across the horse's neck, and this will also
make three (shots? Up, down, horizontal?). Thus, the archer wil] be able to
strike a mortal blow against an enemy in front of him either at short range or
long, For this kind of shooting he would do well to have not less than 10 cubits
(about 6 yards) between himself and his target.

585To shoot right in front of his horse, he should first draw and hold and, tilting
the lower limb of his bow across the animal’s neck, transfer it to his right
side. To do this, he should bring up the lower part of his right thigh on to the
saddle and turn his left until the front of it comes against the saddle as it
presses against the stirrup next to the horse's belly. (D: Some shoot at the
mark as soon as the horse’s head draws level with i.)

To shoot at a target to his rear, the archer should easily and without straining
or forcing turn to the left from his waist and draw his bow at an angle across
his horse's croup. He may also shoot with the bow in a vertical position. Both
methods can be used to shoot upwards or downwards and at short or long
range. (D: The shot is made when the croup is in line with the mark.) This gives
four kinds of rear Shot, and two more at the horizontal will bring the number uD
to six, Then there are two more on the right side, one immediately over the
right thigh and the other to the left of it, bat to shoot in this way is
difficult. [We emend here, reading ‘asir ‘difficult’ for ‘askr ‘ten’, with which
the subject matter has undoubtedly been made to accord, ]

586For another kind of shot to the rear the archer, after drawing and holding, may
bring his right hand up over his head, tuck his head in beneath his right wrist
so that his hand rests in the nape of his neck. This technique will enable him
to engage a target close by the right or left thigh of his mount, By bringing
round his bow-haad once his right hand is anchored in the nape of his neck, he
can shoot forward and dowaward to either side; for by bringing his bow round
over his horse’s neck he can shoot down in front of his right knee. This form of
shooting is called jarmakt, The technique can be varied by holding the bow, as
yet undrawn, with the string on the outside of the left forearm. Bringing the
grip of his bow to the nape, the archer can then nock and lock on his right
shoulder. He can nock while his left hand grips the reins, raise both arms, tuck
in his head under the right forearm, draw, and shoot in the four ways already
described, ie. two to fore and two to rear.

Finally, the archer can shoot to left or right under the horse’s neck. These two
methods complete the fifteen. Here the archer draws and holds, then bends his
left arm to shoot under the neck from one side to the other. This kind of shot
requires him to discard the martingale and lean over slightly. It needs a good
deal of practice. This completes the basic ways of shooting; secondary ways are
legion.

587
As in the case of our own text we are confronted with the problem of deciding
which forms of shooting are considered basic and, again, it is a matter of
conjecture. Under these circumstances it is best to leave the question open.


4. Jarmaki (?): the Term and the Technique

588
Almost all MSS give this term as Jarmaki, jarmuki or the like, which immediately
suggests a relative adjective derived from Çermik or Cermük in the province of
Diyarbakir in modern Turkey, but we tentatively propose that the word be
regarded as the Arabic adjectival form of the Turkish adjective çarpık (
>jarbak>jarmak) ‘awry’, i.e. deviating from the line of sight, Such a term makes
excellent sense, for, by anchoring the drawing hand in the nape of the neck, the
line of the arrow is displaced, albeit deliberately, to the left of the line of
sight in order to


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 83

589
shoot at a target unattainable by means of the normal draw to the chin or side
of the face.

Practical trials show that a modern Western archer not trained in this method of
shooting from boyhood will not find it easy. If the bow is drawn in the normal
way with the string inside the arm, the weapon has to be tilted to enable a full
draw to be achieved. With the string outside it is difficult to avoid hitting
the elbow on loosing. How any accuracy can be achieved is another
problem. Basically, an archer draws to the face so that he can orientate his
shot by looking along the arrow. As the jarmaki technique results in a
relatively large lateral displacement of the arrow from the line of sight,
shooting by this method must be purely instinctive, and skilful application can,
it is clear, only be achieved by considerable practice and experience.

590The advantage of the technique is that it increases the lateral angle over which
a horse-archer can engage a target. By way of example, let us suppose that an
enemy appears about 20° to the right of the direction in which the archer is
riding, and, for some reason, he cannot, or does not wish to, turn to the right
to engage. By rising slightly in his stirrups, putting his weight on the left
foot, and twisting his body to the right so as to bring his right thigh over the
top of the saddle, he can shoot in the normal manner, drawing to the face. When
he reaches the limit to which he can turn his body in this way, but still needs
to extend the arc over which he can shoot because his target lies to the right
of that limit, he can do so by drawing behind the neck as described and
artificially deflecting the line of his arrow to the right. Apart from enabling
a horseman to engage targets over a wider arc, the jarmaki technique is of
definite merit for shooting at very close range when the rider is almost
immediately above his target. Similarly it could be applied by an archer
standing at the top of a fortress and shooting at an enemy at the base of the
wall (below, p. 137)-

Some brief mention is made of this form of shooting by de Bertier, Cordier, and
Guglielmini in Le tir à Parc (Paris, 1900), pp. 9-10, where it is stated,
contrary to the information supplied by Taybughà, that the string must of
necessity lie outside the left arm. Attention is drawn to the support afforded
the drawing hand by the neck which allows the use of a very powerful bow, and
the view is taken by the authors that the horseman’s position favours this kind
of shooting which is the only easy way of engaging a target to the rear. What is
most interesting from our point of view is the statement on the authority of a
contemporary traveller that the technique was still used in Turkestan where he
had several times seen it applied by riders of his escort. The informant had
observed that the horsemen of Turkestan showed great skill in using either hand
to shoot a bow in this way.

591A point worth mentioning here, not because it is in any way connected with the
jarmaki technique, but because it calls for comment too brief for separate
treatment, is the difficulty of shooting under a horse’s neck. How the bow could
fail to strike the horse when the arrow was loosed is almost beyond our
comprehension.


5. Birjas

592‘The birdjas game’, writes Ayalon, ‘is often referred to [in Mameluke historical
sources], but without any particulars whatsoever’ (op. cit., p. 56). Vocalized
as birjas, burjás, or barjás, the term is variously defined by almost all the
lexicographers as (a) ‘a game, similar to that called jarid, in which mounted
players combated or pursued each other throwing sticks’ (Dozy, s.v.); (b) “a
butt to shoot at, especially elevated high in the air’ (Steingass, s.v.); (c) ‘a
mark to shoot at (Redhouse s.v.). In our text the term denotes something
resembling a hoop on a spear. That it was such is undoubtedly true, for some
account of an exercise called the ‘birjds charge’ is to be found in a
sixteenth-century Paris MS in which the point is confirmed (Bibliothèque
Nationale, Arabe 2,826: Kitáb al-makhzün jámi' al-funün, 104a-b). In this the
cavalryman, having set a hoop by means of a wooden truck on top of a short
lance, charges and, engaging the target on his left, aims to snatch up the hoop
with the end of his full-length ‘candle-form’ lance. How the term


-z YERINILU GIN ADUCEA 1 comes to denote ‘a mark to shoot at in Persian and
Turkish can easily be understood both from our text and from other references to
archers’ shooting through rings used in lance exercises (e.g. Hansard, Book of
Archery, p. 121). The definition recorded by Blachére (Dict., s.v.) is,
therefore, correct.

