# On the fundamentals of archery

Among countless numbers of fable? bowmen those most famed for their knowledge
and skill in archery are Bahrüm Gir ibn Yazdigird ibn Shàpür Dhü l-Aktāf, Tahir
al-Balkhi, Ishaq

374ar-Raffa’, and Abū Hashim al-Bawardi (on all of whom, see Comment). These were
the men who won renown for their methods of shooting, and from ancient times
right up to the present people have been adherents of their teachings. At-Tabari
(p. 40) it was who transmitted their techniques, though his own method was
eclectic.

Each of these Great Masters? had a method of his own which suited the
requirements of his trunk and limbs, depending, as will be mentioned in due
course, on whether his measurements were long, short, or medium and whether he
had a broad chest with a long arm-span or vice versa.  Rarely will any one man
in all respects be of exactly the same proportions as any single one of the
Masters. On the contrary, physical proportions are bound to differ from one
person to another.  You will, therefore, appreciate that all methods must really
be eclectic (ikhwiyari) according to the different requirements imposed by the
size of one’s trunk and limbs.

375There are differences of opinion on what constitutes the fundamentals of archery
(usti ar- ramy).* According to Abū Hashim, they are four: grasping, locking,*
drawing, and releasing.  To these Tahir added sighting, thus making them
five. The majority of archers follow this teaching and quote the following
verses:


‘Archery is the finest thing that God's Messenger (Muhammad) recommended, and
the manliest of men are those who can be proud of their shooting.  Its
fundamentals are five, of which the first is the grasp, followed by locking,
drawing, releasing,

376
and sighting.’

Some add nocking and make the fundamentals six. This is the number we adopt for
the simple reason that a fundamental of anything is that which is indispensable
to it, and, as nocking is indispensable to archery, it is therefore a
fundamental. There are some who add stringing, but strictly speaking stringing
is connected with the art of bow making because it requires a knowledge

377
DL


how to prepare strings.

378
COMMENT I. The Masters of Archery and the Great Masters


A Persian ruler of the Sasanid dynasty, Bahram Gir, or Vahram V (A.D. 420-38),
is frequently accorded a prominent position in archery literature. In the works
of pocts and illuminators— mainly Persian—his legendary feats as an archer and
hunter are a commonplace. He is “Bahram, that great Hunter’ whose name is known
to many through Fitzgerald's Rubdiydt of Omar

379
37


faT4OS, UNV SHOVIQ

380



381



382
WEE g


^v

383



384ueuqejso


Ny pep?  1219Ho S. vy Visuad indeysin, o ^ uBlyay SYYELES a + .  Virg
pisauqy. NVISIYV WL

385



386
SUDIHSY a


ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY 39 Khayyam. In technical writings certain styles
of shooting and points of technique are not in- frequently ascribed to, or
associated with, the Sasanid kings, and in this connexion the names of Ardashir
(Ardashir I, son of Papak, A.D. 226-41) and Khusraw (Chosroes I, A.D. 531-79)
are to be found in addition to that of Bahram Gir (see, e.g. Nihayah, pp. 63-66
et passim). :

387An examination of Mardi’s Tabsirah, which we know to have been written in the
time of Saladin, reveals among acknowledged exponents of archery a preponderance
of persons whose names bespeak their role as repositories, transmitters, and
continuators of the techniques of Central Asia and the Iranian cultural orbit of
medieval times. Typical are the following examples: as-Sarakhsi, ‘of Sarakhs’,
between Meshed and Mery (Khorasan), at-Tirmidhi, ‘of Termez’, on the Upper Oxus
near Balkh (Khorasan, now in Uzbekistan), al-Harawi, ‘of Herat’ (Khorasan, .
now in N.W. Afghanistan) as-Samarqandi, ‘of Samarkand’, principal town of
Transoxiana (now capital of the province of Samarkand in Uzbekistan). Names of
this kind, though generally less numerous than in the Tabstrah, could easily be
cited from other Arabic and Islamic treatises on archery (e.g. Hein, 751, XIV,
pp. 300, 307, 313, etc.). Furthermore, the ascription of this or that technique
to the men of Merv or Balkh, for instance, or to the people of Khorasan or
Transoxiana is not an unusual phenomenon (e.g. Tabstrah, 73a; Niháyah, Ch. xiii,
p. 69, Cf.  Arab Archery, index, s.v. Khurasan, etc.).

The dates at which the archers named by Mardi flourished—among them Tahir,
Ishaq, and Abi Hashim mentioned in the first paragraph of this chapter—have so
far defied our attempts at discovery. Indeed, for all the pre-eminence with
which Tahir, Ishaq, and Abū Hashim subse- quently emerge in Islamic archery
literature as the Imams, or ‘Great Masters’, of technique, we have yet to
uncover any biographical details that will shed light on their dates. To judge
from their names, they were certainly all Muslims and therefore could not have
antedated the first quarter of the seventh century A.D., and, as they are
mentioned by Mardi, the second half of the twelfth century can be taken as a
rough terminus ante quem. To suppose that they lived no earlier than the middle
of the eighth century would, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be a
reasonable guess since it was from early Abbasid times that large-scale
recruitment of troops and officials from Khorasan and Transoxiana began
(Introduction, p. xxiii). Other possibilities suggest themselves, but hypothesis
is no substitute for factual evidence.

388In the matter of dates this is as far as we can go. As regards Abū Hashim, it is
important to dispel all doubts surrounding what, for convenience's sake, we will
call his cognomen. The problem is that archery literature confronts us with four
possibilities, viz. al-Bawardi, -Bárüdi, -Mawardi, -Nawardi. So far as
Taybugha's treatise is concerned, A? and the MSS of the B group limit the choice
to al-Bárüdi and al-Bawardi. Of these the first is the relative adjective of a
small town in Lower Egypt, while the second is that of Abiward, or Baward, a
town and district on the northern slopes of the mountains of Khorasan in an area
now within Turkmenistan - (U.S.S.R.) Having regard to our observations in the
first two paragraphs above and bearing in mind the reputation and prowess of the
archers of Khorasan, we take Abii Hashim al-Bawardi to be the man’s true name
and believe Faris and Elmer’s—and indeed Hein’s—Abi Hashim al- Mawardi to be
erroneous (Arab Archery, p. 16, et passim and Isl., XIV, p. 329. Cf. also
Nrhayah, passim) To an Arabist it will be obvious how readily the rather unusual
Bawardi could be transformed by a scribe into the much more familiar Miwardi or
the easier Bariidi, or else be corrupted to the meaningless Náwardi as in the
Tabsirah (43b).

The second element of the name Ishaq ar-Raffa’ is taken by Faris and Elmer to be
ar-Raqqi, ‘of Raqqah', a place in northern Syria (op. cit., p. 16. Cf. Hein,
loc. cit.), but this reading runs counter to an overwhelming weight of evidence
in favour of ar-Raff@ and is an obvious ortho- graphic error. .

389As regards Tahir al-Balkhi, the second half of his name links either him or his
forebears with Balkh, now a village in northern Afghanistan, but once a great
capital of Khorasan and a centre renowned, among other things, for the
excellence of its horsemen and archers (cf. Ritter, Isl.,


40 ." ^* SARACEN ARCHERY

390
XVIII, p. 120). In Arab Archery, p. 114, he is made out to be the grandson of
Shápür Dhü l-Aktāf (Shapur II, A.D. 309-79), but if the author of the Tabsrah is
correct in naming him Tahir ibn Mubammad (702), he would have been a Muslim end
(unless he was a convert adopting the patronymic ‘ibn Muhammad’—which is most
unlikely) the son of a Muslim, and could obviously not have been the grandson of
a man who died two and a half centuries before Islam.

In at-Tabari (‘of Tabaristán', a Persian province south of the Caspian) we have
to do with Ahmad ibn “Abd Allah Muhibb ad-Din at-Tabari (d. 1295?) who was the
author of The Clear -. Book on Archery (Kitab al-wādik fi r-ramy, etc.) of which
there are several extant manuscripts (Cf. Hein, ibid., p. 300; Ritter, ibid.,
136, 141). He has no connexion whatever with the great historian and scholar Abū
Ja'far Muhammad ibn Jarir at-Tabari (A.D. 839-923) as certain Muslim authors
seem to think (e.g. Musraf3 Kani in Hein, ibid., p. 299). From his own testimony
we learn that he was trained in the teaching of Abū Hashim by Muhammad ibn ‘Isa
s-Samar- qandi, in that of Tahir al-Balkhi by ‘Abd ar-Rahman al-Farawi (‘of
Fariwah’, now Kızıl Arvat, Turkmenistan), and in that of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ by Abū
Sa‘id al-Khwarizmi (‘of Khwarizm’, now Khiva, Uzbekistan) (Wadih, 57b ff., Ist.,
43b fE).

391
2. The Fundamentals of Archery


Taybugha's statement that there were differences of opinion regarding the number
of funda- mentals is amply borne out by what we have learned of the subject from
several other Islamic manuals, In general the authors of these works go into
much greater detail than does Taybugha and deal not only with the ‘roots’, or
fundamentals, but also with the ‘branches’ (furi), or secondary bases, of
archery (e.g. Hein, ibid., pp. 330-31 and Arab Archery, p. 17). An enumera- tion
and discussion of conflicting views on the number and nature of these ‘roots and
branches’ are beyond the scope of the present work. Nevertheless, we feel
obliged to comment, firstly, that the fundamentals attributed by Taybughà to Abū
Hashim and Tahir (see also Hein, ibid., p. 330) do not wholly agree with those
ascribed to them, for instance, by at- Tabari and the author of Arab Archery
(whose information may well have been derived from the Wadih) and, secondly,
that our author makes no mention whatsoever of any views held on the subject by
Ishaq. Table 1 below will enable the reader to see in what details at-Tabari
differs from Taybughà as regards Abi Hashim and Tahir (Wadik, 232-2442, Ist.,
17a-18a. Cf. Arab Archery, pp. 16-17).

392
: TABLE 1 .- Tabari Taybughà I. Abi Hashim

I. Grasp (gabdah) Grasping (gab¢) Feb rice Ext Ln

393. Aiming (rimad) rawing (madd) 4. Loosing (flat) Releasing (itlag)

2. Tahir

3941. Nocking (tafsitg) Grasping 2. Clench Locking 3. Grasp Ss 4. Aiming Releasing
5. Loosing |. Sighting (nazar)


N.B. As Taybughi's technical vocabulary differs from that of at-Tabari, an
attempt has been made in the table to carry over the differences into the
English rendering, although in practice there i$ no difference between aiming
and sighting (¢‘timdad, nagar), loosing and releasing (i/iat, itg), and
so-on. In Arab Archery, p. 49, the qaflah—translated by Faris and Elmer as
‘clench’

395
ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY 41


and for that reason retained by us—is defined as the folding of the little
finger, the ring-finger, and the middie finger tightly into the palm of the
right hand, We see no reason to accept such a definition and for linguistic and
technical reasons take the view that in most contexts it is synonymous with the
term ‘agd, thereby concurring with the opinion implied in Faris and Elmer’s note
in Arab Archery, p. 16, n. 13 (below, p. 54).

396In Table 2 are listed the fundamentals ascribed to Ishaq by at-Tabari (cf. also
Hein, ibid., p. 331): |

TABLE 2 TE

397. Standing to the mark (al-intisdb ilā I-'alamah) so that it is in line with the
left eye.  . Bracing (£r), or stringing. (On the technical difference between
the two terms, which we, like Fatis and Elmer, treat as synonymous, see Arab
Archery, p. 162.)  Nocking.  Clench.  Grasp.


tob

398
Aiming.  . Drawing on to the mouth (al-jarr ‘ald I-fam).  . Halting of the
arrowhead between the knuckles (or, perhaps, ‘phalanges’) of the thumb.


POW AAEY

399
Loosing.  Io. Letting the left hand go forward {al-fathah bi-sh-shamal).


This last is clearly a form of follow-through in which the left hand is allowed
to move away from the body towards the target at the instant of loosing, but
without any rotary movement of the bow as recommended by Taybugha (below,
Ch. 14). Faris and Elmer would appear to have been confronted with the same
expression and to have misunderstood its meaning, for they speak of ‘opening the
hand’ (Arab Archery, p. 17. Cf. also Hein, loc. cit.) The sense is made
perfectly clear in the Wagih (but not Ist. MS) 24a by the gloss wa-hiya t-tazla
‘that is to say, slipping’, where zaz/i; would appear to be a technical synonym
with the meaning ‘slipping the hand, causing, or allowing, it to go forward with
a smooth, sliding movement’. This interpretation makes excellent technical
sense, for there can be no sound loosing without some stable forward movement of
the bow-hand. (Cf. Fig. 46). i
