# On grasping the bow

Grasping is the act of placing the side of the marn (below and p. 45) of the
bow’s grip in the crease which lies between the palm of the hand and the fingers
(i.e. the proximal, sometimes called by the author the first crease). This
action is discussed first not only because it is the first of the fundamentals,
but also because the first thing that a man does to a bow is to apply his grasp
to it.  The matn is the middle of the back of the bow’s grip.

Now, if the bow’s grip is placed in a man’s grasp after the manner prescribed,
the spine of the matn (lit. ‘the middle of the matn’s back’; below, p. 45)
should lie in the centre of the proximal phalanges of the fingers. This is
Tahir’s method (see, however, p. 130). It is the best and most practical of all
the grasps and the least likely to occasion mishaps. To elaborate: if you wish
to grasp the bow for the purpose of shooting, then, with your hand open, first
place the side of the

402
: vo DISTAL CREASE DISTAL PHALANX «———— Á i ("last crease’) MIDDLE PHALANX
MIDDLE CREASE E : | (‘second crease’) PROXIMAL PHALANX -£ f 7 -] 4*9


DISTAL PHALANX oy E a of ] free.

403
AP N ! N METACARPO- CUM. AUS SN LJ PHALANGEAL CREASE : \ a * (‘proximal crease")
[THENAR EMINENCE} CRX 9 x (0 (first crease") "WE or x = HEEL OF THE HAND yg — -]
= 2 m s MTS [HYPOTHENAR EMINENCE] EE ors BYE ZIND (see glossary) | der AL £d)


FtG. 18. PARTS OF THE HÀND

404
42


ON GRASPING THE BOW 43

405
matn of the bow's grip in the crease between the palm and the fingers. In the
case of a big palm with long fingers, the spine of the matn must then be placed
centrally in the middle crease formed by the fingers (ie. the proximal
ingerphalangeal crease, sometimes called in Arabic the second

crease). A man with short fingers, on the other hand, should put the ‘spine of
the! marn in the first crease, which is the one lying between the base of the
fingers and the palm. Finally, a man with medium-sized fingers should place the
spine of the marn! of his grip in the centre of the proximal phalanges
(Fig. 19). I believe this to be a basic operation that is second to none. If
your fingers are too long for the grip, you will find it a great advantage to
make it thicker by affixing a piece of leather.*

406



407Square Intermediate Oblique Fic. 19. GRASPS ON THE Bow (2). Long
fingers. (b). Medium fingers. (c) Short fingers.


Once the grip has been placed in the appropriate hand with fingers outspread,
the bow should be grasped with the little finger followed by the second
finger. In sequence, the little finger should be applied first, then the second,
or ring-, finger and finally the third, or middle, finger.  The pressure applied
to the grip should grow very much like a building, and just as the archer should
grasp first with the little finger and then with the second, so also, if he is
to use his fingers (qubbád) properly, he should begin by exerting the greatest
pressure with the little finger, followed next by the ring-finger until finally
the pressure reaches its lowest in the middle finger.  . You may then also say
that under these conditions the pressure on the grip will give a hold as

408strong as a building, so that the bow will neither deviate nor turn in the
hand. The pressure exerted by the grasp should be at its peak the very moment
the arrow is loosed.

Once you have a tight hold on the grip with the said three fingers, gently curl
over the end of the index finger without tensing it in any way. Fasten it only
loosely on the grip, for if you tense the index finger, the other three fingers
already tensed will for that very reason relax, and you will accordingly impair
your grasp. The rule for the index finger is that it should not be wrapped
around the grip. Only the end of it should be bent over the margin of the matn,
and that is all.*

409Having bent over the end of the index finger, place your thumb upon it in
contact with the

grip of your bow. Your thumb must Le as still as a corpse without even the
slightest movement.  It should not be pressed into the grip because it forms the
guide for the arrow, and if it is tensed the arrow will blister it. Tensing of
the thumb will also slacken the grasp.

410The grasp just described is the best, the most practical, and the safest of all
the various possi- bilities. It was Tahir al-Balkhi’s choice ‘and is known as
the grasp of *99'!.*

- Should you wish to use a different grasp from the one I have just mentioned,
grasp as before with the three appropriate fingers, but place the end of the
thumb over the back of the middle

411
44 SARACEN ARCHERY


finger. This will give you a different kind of grasp from the first—and a highly
important grasp at that, When using it, always tuck in the index finger behind
the matn so that when the maximum draught (al-wafa’ at-tàmm) has been attained
at full draw (below, p. 56), the finger will not lie in front of the arrowhead,
which may subsequently split and injure it. This grasp is extremely useful, and
will give a highly effective shot, as well as a good distance in flight
shooting. It will enable the archer to draw a longer arrow than is possible with
any other kind of grasp "because the base of the thumb can then spread out,
thereby allowing the arrowhead to be brought in behind the grip as far as the
skill of the archer permits—a considerable advantage in flight shooting
involving the use of a single bow and arrow. Furthermore, the archer's draw on -
the bow will be much stronger than any other. The Turks call this particular
grasp the changal-i báz (Pers. ‘falcon’s talons’). It is the flight shooter's
grasp because he can use it to get an extra length of draw on the arrow and
bring in the arrowhead right up to the very base of the thumb so that it
(Lc. the head) leaves the grip of his bow. This draught has neither superior nor
equal because the archer can bring the arrowhead in upon himself (inside the
grip).*

412
Fic. 20. THE ‘FALCON’s TALONS’


There are some archers who run the shaft over the ‘proximal’ phalanx of the
thumb. This is a perfectly good technique, Others run it over the index finger
and slant the thumb towards the arrow. Others there are who set up the thumb and
place the index finger beneath it so that they then look as though they are
reckoning thirteen (on finger-reckoning, below, p. 167). The arrow in this case
passes over the top of the thumb-nail. There are yet others who run the arrow
over the ends of the index finger and the thumb and look as though they are
reckoning thirty.  The first two techniques, however, are to be commended
above. all the rest. Those who use the second of these, incidentally, will run
the arrow through the middle of the groove formed between the thumb and the
index finger. No fault ever results from it.

413Do take care lest the ends of the fingers touch the heel of the hand when
grasping. I give this gtave warning to anyone who would touch the heel of the
hand with the ends of his fingers 'while grasping!, as will indeed be the case
if the grip of his bow is too thin or his fingers too long. The point has
already been adequately explained. dh. j


ON GRASPING THE BOW 45

414
COMMENT I. The Matn


From our author's definition of the term matn as the ‘middle of the back of the
grip’ (wast zahr al-gabdah) it is not immediately clear what meaning the term
‘middle’ is intended to convey.  When he goes on to speak of the ‘middie of the
back of the mam’ we are confronted with the bewildering problem of determining
what is meant by ‘the middle of the back of “the middle of the back” of the
grip’. One’s first reaction is to suspect a pleonasm. Careful reading of the
text, however, shows that this is not the case. It will be seen that the mam has
a side (jab) and a back (zahr) and that if the archer places the side of the
matn in the proximal crease, ‘the middle of the matn’s back’ will lie in the
centre of the proximal phalanges of his fingers. From this it is evident that
the ‘middle of the matn’s back’ is the mid-line longitudinally dividing the
dorsal surface of the grip. The matn’s ‘back’ is, as it were, its backbone, or
spine, and might be taken as a strip about $ in. wide running down the centre of
the handle.

415It remains only to determine what is intended by ‘the middle of the back of the
grip’ as a definition of matn. If it is meaningful, it can only be interpreted
as that section of the dorsal surface of the handle which the archer actually
grasps when shooting. This interpretation is borne out by the fact that in MSS
of the C group (a) the term matr is replaced by the expression ‘back of the
grip’ (zahr al-gabdak), which we are then told is ‘that part (sc. of the
dorsalsur face of the grip) which is in contact with the fingers when the bow is
drawn’ (C', 36b; C?, 6ob; C*, 29a), and is defined as such (C!, 38b; C*, 63b;
C*, 318), and (b) the archer is given the follow- ing advice: ‘Try to apply your
grasp to the middle of the grip so that the space remaining at the top of the
grip should be the same as at the bottom. If a fingers width is left both at the
top and the bottom, it is as required. 'To have more or less is incorrect,
although no harm will be done if the upper space by which the arrow passes is
just a little bigger than it should be’ (C1, 37b; C?, 62a; C?, 30a). For our
author, therefore, matn—in the present context at least—means the centre, or
middle, section of the grip's dorsal surface, i.e. the section lying between
each end of that surface of the grip. This interpretation is wholly consistent
with the meaning of matn as (a) ‘back’, i.c. the part of the body extending from
the neck to the end of the backbone and therefore excluding the extremities
between which it lies, and (b) ‘main part’ of a thing.

To sum up, the matr is the ‘body’ or ‘centre section’ of the handle above and
below which lie its extremities, while the ‘middle of the back of the main’ is
the ‘mid-line’, ‘spine’, or ‘backbone’ that runs down it. The body of the grip
of Middie Eastern composite bows is almost invariably raised into a conspicuous
ridge, or hump, on the dorsal surface (Fig. 6). This was formed by the
application of layers of sinew over a shaped wooden base and it is perhaps not
without significance that matn may also denote in Arabic a raised, hard ridge.

416It cannot be overemphasized that both mam and gakr al-gabdah are frequently used
quite loosely and that the meaning can only be exactly determined by
context. Later in the work our author uses matn without any qualifications to
mean ‘mid-line of that part of the dorsal surface which is held when
shooting’. i


B. x 2. Grasping the Bow

417The choice of grasp to suit any particular archer mainly depends on the length
of his fingers.  A variety of different grasps could be enumerated to confirm
the pronouncement: ‘Expert archers have disagreed on the exact manner of holding
the grip’ (Arab Archery, p. 46). At the same time a good deal of conflicting
evidence could be presented from medieval Islamic sources, but to little
purpose. We therefore confine ourselves merely to directing attention to three
basic grasps later discussed by Taybugha (Ch. 22, pp. 122): — |

(a) The square grasp (al-gabdah al-murabba'ah). Attributed to Abū Hashim. See,
however, D!, 26a; D*, 55a: “This is the method of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ and the reason
for it is that if one's

418
' OXEREAARMAALAN (S SAL AR AN L


fingers are long (sc. like Isháq's), they will turn on the grip.’ (Cf. C!, 36b;
C*, 60b-612; C?, 29a.)

419(b) The oblique grasp (al-qabdah al-muharrafah). Attributed to Tahir. “This is
Tahir’s method ... Which is suitable for persons with a small palm and short
fingers... A man with short fingers should put the back of the handle in the
first crease between palm and fingers to give him control over his grip-fingers
(gubbäd).’ (D!, loc cit.; D*, loc. cit.)

(c) The intermediate grasp. Attributed to Ishaq, but see D', 26a, and D*, 55a,
according to which it was the teaching of Abū Hashim, Bahram Gir, and
at-Tabari. (Cf. C', 36b; C*, 60b; C?, 29a.) Almost all other authors consulted
by us, however, agree that Isháq's grasp was intermediate. (Tabsirah, 48b; Arab
Archery, p. 47, etc.)

420It should be noted that the grasp attributed to ‘Tahir in the second paragraph
of the chapter (p. 42) is at variance with what our author has to say
later. Irrespective of the assertions of other writers, we are justified in
supposing that cither Taybughà or some scribe hes made a slip; for he himself
tells us later not only that Tahir had short fingers, for which he recommends,
even in the present chapter; that the marn be placed in the proximal crease, but
also that Tahir did in fact place the marn in that crease formed by the joints
of the little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger (below, p. 130).

A wide range of opinion on the manner in which the grip should be held and
conflicting views on the persons to whom particular grasps should be attributed
may be derived from a number of sources, notably Tabsirak, 47b-50a; Wadih,
30a-b, 372, 432-b, 47a ff.; Nihayah, Ch. vil, p. 64, etc. See also Arab Archery,
pp. 46-49. Hein, Isl., XV, p. 61, should be read with caution as corruption in
the text used as the basis for translation has passed unrecognized, and there is
also some misinterpretation.

421
3. The 'Falcon's Talons’


The name of this grasp is spelled and pointed in A! (41b, line 3) as
sinkilbaz. The expression is Persian as indicated in the text. It is
conceivable, but less likely, that we have to do with an arabicized form with
the same meaning, viz. chang al-baz. That our etymology and spelling are correct
is—in spite of the variety of forms in which the expression occurs in other
MSS—almost certain, for the manner of gripping described in our text strongly
resembles that of a falcon's talons, and in a society familiar with falconry
such a comparison would be undeniably meaningful.  Mustafa Kani compares the
configuration of the fist of the flight shooter to the shape of the head of a
harp (Hein Jsi., XV, pp. 62-63. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 92-93), but since chang can
mean not only ‘harp’, but also ‘talons’, his statement is suspect, especially if
we take into account his need to explain that the harp is a ‘Frankish
(i.e. European) stringed instrument".

422The technique described, whereby the arrowhead is drawn inside the grip, is of
extraordinary interest. To do this, an archer must have considerable control,
for such a practice without the use of sóme shield such as the Turkish siper
(Hein, ibid., pp. 9-18; Klopsteg, pp. 59-67 and his figs. 28, 29, 305 Arab
Archery, pp. 174-5 and plate facing p. 40) is fraught with danger, and the
hazards of overdrawing an arrow have already been mentioned (p. 33). The
technique is a strictly flight-shooting device, but it must have been used, for
in D+, 27a, and D*, 56a, we en- counter the remarkable comment: ‘I have seen a
man at full draw who, by means of this grasp, - drew four finger-widths more
than his opponent. This was because he used a short arrow, yet attained maximum
draught at full draw (istatofa bi-l-wafã'. at-tamam).’.

As a flight-shooting device the technique would have obvious advantages if the
shot were Successfully accomplished, but it would be a rash man who would use it
in battle. It is the

423hazard which most likely ied to the development of the siper (Pers. 'shield")—a
shallow groove of horn, ivory or tortoise-shell, about 1 in. wide and 4
in. long, which was strapped to the wrist, enabling the point of the arrow to be
drawn several inches inside the bow. Two specimens of this shield are to be
found in the Manchester Museum (Ingo Simon Collection, Nos, 0.7739 and
O.7740). See Fig. 40.
