# On flight shooting

If, in shooting, it is your wish to outdistance your competitors you should use
a bow with short dustérs and choose a light arrow. It has already been remarked
(above, p. 8) that flight bows should have short dustars or, in other words, be
shorter in the working limbs than ordinary bows, have long necks, and be quick
to recover (sari'at ar-rujit')* upon removal of the string (Le. have greater
resilience than the ordinary bow). Enough, too, has already been said about the
kind of arrows to be used. We need only add that the lighter the arrow, the
greater its range. The lightest flight arrows in our experience weigh six
dirhams (285° 6 gr.). They break easily and can only be used by really
first-class bowmen, for if the archer, in locking, subjects an arrow of this
kind to pressure, or if, upon loosing, he tilts the top of his bow or twists the
grip, he will break it. Flight shooting, in fact, clearly demonstrates whether
an archer knows his business or not, and shows up his proficiency or
incompetence in the art of bowmanship.

681It is generally agreed that in flight shooting you should keep the sun and wind
behind you and stand obliquely with legs apart, Stand on your right leg, all the
time keeping the left at ease, for although both legs have a part in the stance,
it is the right that should take the weight as the left is held at ease ‘from
the moment the draw begins until the loose is actually completed!.? It is a good
idea, therefore, to put your left foot up on to a stone or something that will
serve the same


purpose.

682‘The moment he begins to draw? the flight shooter should tilt the foot of his
bow forwards and bring up his bow-hand until he reaches the point where half the
sky is exactly halved. In other words, he should find the point of elevation
that lies half-way between the zenith and the horizon; for if the hand is raised
beyond or below that point, some loss of range will result.  Great care must
therefore be taken to determine the right elevation and to set the bow at the
correct angle. For precise reckoning the archer should take an elevated object
of the appropriate height or a spot of the same altitude and use it as a
guide.**

Given a perfect draw and loose, you will succeed in outstripping other
competitors and take the prize if you follow my advice. Instructions relating to
the draw and loose have already been given. It remains only to note that the
greater the draw, the greater the distance attained.

683For perfect flight performance the archer should lock the arrow without exerting
pressure on any part of the nock and, having drawn with true alignment ‘of arms,
shoulders, fists, and shaft!  as fully as the ‘greater draw’ (wafa’ nihdyah)
permits, loose with a rapid snatch and twist accom- panied by a ‘forward’ and
upward thrust ‘against the grip’ as he spreads his chest and arms.  Some flight
shooters move forward a little and release while still in motion, accompanying
the action with a hard stamp of the left foot. This technique is a great asset
to anyone who can train himself to it and really carry out our instructions in
the proper manner. !It will, however, thoroughly discredit a man if he doesn't
know how to apply it correctly and will result in a poor distance. The real art
lies in having a fully drawn arrow at the moment of loosing and simul-


104

684
ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 105


taneously timing the actions of stamping, chest expansion, and inspiration to
coincide with the departure of the arrow from its true nocking-point at the base
of the thumb-lock. The slightest deviation from this ideal will result in a bad
shot.!*

685Certain advantages are to be derived from flight shooting. For instance, it
teaches an archer not only to appreciate the significance of atmospheric
conditions, but also to draw a taut bow and develop a sharp, clean loose.*
Furthermore he wil! learn to attain maximum range and effective- ness, which is
what is wanted in warfare, especially when it comes to siege operations. It
does, on the other hand, have its drawbacks in that it can reduce his degree of
accuracy and precision in shooting, impair good grouping (jam), increase his
expenditure and debt, and bequeath a legacy of enmity between archers and their
nearest and dearest."

Among the most cunning tricks that can be played when shooting flight arrows is
one in which the archer drills a hole through the shaft near the fletching and
plugs the hole when making his own shot, but clears it when it is his opponent’s
turn to shoot. Another trick is to drill down the centre of the shaft from
inside the nock and to leave the hole open when shooting himself, but to fill it
with a metal plug when it is his opponent's turn. These tricks, of course, can
only be played when it is stipulated that the shooting be done with one bow and
one arrow. The use of such practices makes the acceptance of any prize illegal
because it is cheating and not permitted by the

686-Jaw.* An impertinent, hard-faced, and impudent character, however, can use such
means to great effect without the application of any great skill.

The subject of sharp practices puts me in mind of the story of a Persian archer
in Khwarizm (or, Khwarazm; Kharezm) whose story is as follows. ‘I had heard’, he
said, ‘that an archer in Nishapur was shooting short flight arrows, so I went
out and spent several days looking for him.”  In the course of the search he
suddenly came upon a man on horseback carrying a bowcase containing a bow and
arrows. ‘So we sat talking,’ he went on, ‘and the time for the mid-day prayer
came round, so the man got up to perform his ablution before prayer.” When he
had gone I took a look inside the man’s bowcase and was surprised to find that
it contained some flight arrows measuring about six and a half fists (gabdahs;
i.e. about 21 in.) in length. Two fists were of reed (gasab), two of khalanj
wood (Cornelian Cherry?), two of brazil-wood (baggam), and the remaining half
fist of yamir, or ibex horn. Having looked at them, I put them back and then
found that there was also an arrow-guide (mjrat) with them. When the man
returned, I remarked “I suppose you are good at shooting short flight arrows?"
“Yes,” he replied, “with the aid of an arrow-guide (majrd).” He then showed me
his bow, and I found two beads of lead on his bow- string. “Shall I do you a
good turn?" I asked. “Since you are so kind,” he replied. So I said, “Let me
then give you these twenty dinars and this nag 'in exchange for your equipment’
and you will return safe and sound, for I pity you arriving in Khw4rizm with
this collection of tackle!  They will be up in arms against you and really put
you through it.” Whereupon he agreed to my suggestion and was delighted with
me.’

687This story is clear enough to require no long explanation. We shail come back to
that later.


COMMENT 1. Flight Shooting: General Considerations

688
Flight shooting is a sport in which the archer strives for maximum distance,
accuracy being of minor importance, Maximum distance depends on the design of
the arrow and its attainment of maximum initial velocity. The latter is, in
turn, dependent upon the highest rate of recovery of which the flight shooter’s
bow is capable. Rate of recovery, i.e. the relative speed with which the bow’s
limbs spring back to assume the form that they had before the commencement of
the draw, can, as Taybugha correctly observes, be increased by shortening the
working part of the limb, The point can be simply illustrated: if a short stick
is bent and allowed to fly back, it will


106 SAKACEN ARCHERY

689
obviously travel faster than a longer stick of the same section. Practical
application of the concept by the bowyer is a problem requiring a stady of
advanced bow design—a subject outside our present field. The scientific
principles involved have been examined by Klopsteg, who devotes to them a
complete chapter of his study of the Telhis, pp. 141-66.

Also essential to good flight shooting is a fast draw combined with a skilful
loose that will give the arrow a clean flight with minimal gadding or wagging,
since any lateral movement on the part of an arrow wili result in increased drag
and reduced range. A follow-through properly executed with a thrust of the
bow-hand against the grip at exactly the right moment will add several yards to
the distance that would otherwise be achieved, The shooting technique demands
the perfection of a rhythmic whole from beginning to end which can only be
acquired after many months of practice.

690Contrary to what the layman might suppose, flight shooting is not a simple
matter, nor is it merely a question of equipment and physical strength. It is an
art requiring of the experienced bowman the exercise of considerable skill if he
is to attain the extra few yards needed to give him victory over his equally
experienced competitors. On the technique of flight shooting a volume could be
written, but because of the scope and complexity of the subject we make no
attempt to compress the details within the narrow confines of a page or so. Nor
can we offer a satisfactory bibliography because the topic is one on which very
little has so far been published. Most, if not all, archers acquire their
knowledge of flight shooting by trial and error. Finally, a word of
warning. From the point of view of design the requirements of target/war/hunting
bows and their corresponding arrows differ from those of the bows and arrows of
the flight shooter. The first are not infrequently confused with the second, and
it should be noted that Kiopsteg’s observations on ballistics relate to arrows
of the second, rather than the first, of these two distinct classes.

In the Western archer’s mind flight shooting is associated with the Ottoman
Turks, partly because of references to their feats in European sources dating
from at least the eighteenth century, but more especially perhaps because of an
acquaintance with Hansard and a direct or indirect knowledge of the writings of
Mustafa Kani, Hein, Klopsteg, and Payne-Gallwey.  Although Ottoman flighr
shooting is not our direct concern, it is not without interest or relevance to
the present theme, and since Ottoman practice is comparatively well known and
seems to have had certain affinities with that of the Mamelukes, it cannot be
left out of account in the following paragraphs.

691
2. Aids to Flight Shooting


Flight shooters may, of course, use a full-length atrow. Greater distances,
however, can be attained with a shorter arrow, and the Ottomans, who brought the
sport to a high degree of perfection, used—in the nineteenth century at
least—small barrelled arrows about 24 in. in length and only about 150 gr. in
weight. To shoot such an arrow and at the same time bring the bow to full draw,
some sort of aid is needed since the tip of the arrowhead must come well inside
the bow.  The Ottomans used a grooved horn shelf known as a siper
(Pers. ‘shield’), which was strapped to the wrist of the bow-hand (Fig. 40). The
point of the arrow rested on the siper at full draw, and the groove guided it
past the bow when the string was loosed. Hein, lacking practical knowledge _ of
the bow and its accessories, did not fully understand the siper. For details the
reader is there- fore advised to consult Klopsteg, pp. 59-67, or failing that,
to refer to the brief account given by Faris and Elmer in Arab Archery,
pp. 174-75. Examples are preserved in Manchester Museum, Ingo Simon Collection,
Nos. 0.7739 and 0.7740.

692The majr@ (‘channel, guide’) to which our author refers and which seems to have
been synonymous with mijrat was also designed to enable the shooter to draw his
string further than the length of his arrow would otherwise permit. Used both by
Arabs and Persians (e.g. Arab Archery, pp. 124 ff. and pp. 174-76), it was, in
its simplest form, a slim, grooved channel of


ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 107 wood as long as a normal arrow (Fig. 52) and was drawn
with the short arrow inside the groove,

693
When the archer loosed, the arrow alone was shot and the puide remained, giving
the general effect of a crossbow. Arrow-guides were of various kinds as will be
seen in Ch, 26,



694

Fic. 40. THE TURKISH Siper

695
3. Behaviour of Flight Arrows


Great distances were achieved by Ottoman flight shooters (below, sect. 6), who
owed their success not only to the design of their bows, but also to that of
their arrows. Since we know of no study on the behaviour of fight arrows and as
the subject is relevant to the sectional arrow described in the anecdote related
in our text, we take up tbe point in some detail.

696In air a missile will achieve its greatest range when it is projected at an
angle of 431? and strikes the ground at an angle of about 54^. Now, a normal
target or war arrow has its centre of gravity (CG) 2-3 in. in front of its
geometric centre, The centre of pressure (CP) is the point through which all
upward forces may be considered to act, and with such arrows the CP is 2-3
in. behind the geometric centre, mainly because of the area of the
fletchings. The distance between the CG and CP gives the righting-moment and, as
this is relatively large, the long axis of the arrow remains virtually parallel
to the flight path. During its flight the arrow pitches through about 98° from
—44° to -+ 54°, and its pitching-rate is the same as the rate of change of angle
of the flight path.


108 SARACEN ARCHERY

697
Existing Ottoman flight arrows have their CG fractionally behind the geometric
centre of the arrow, and, as a result of their small fletchings, the CP is moved
forward and lies close to the CG (for detailed measurements, see F. W. Isles,
‘Turkish Flight Arrows’, in FSAA, vol. 4, 196r, pp. 25-28). Consequently, the
righting-moment is reduced, and the pitching-rate of the flight arrow is slower
than the rate of change of angle of the flight path. In this way a gliding
effect is produced, and the flight arrow does not follow the parabola of a
‘normal’ missile,

Apart from this way of reducing the pitching-rate to obtain the desired effect,
there js another approach to the problem. A sectional arrow may be used. In this
case, the weight is concentrated as far as possible at each end of the arrow,
and the ends are joined by the lightest available material.  This increases the
inertia of the arrow, and, provided that other factors are correctly related to
it, a reduced pitching-rate again results. It is likely that the sectional arrow
described in the text was of relatively heavy brazil-wood at the nock end, of
reed or bamboo in the centre, and of Cornelian Cherry in the foreshaft. The ibex
horn would be the material of which the head was made, This would stick into the
ground at the end of the flight with little risk of damage unless a stone was
struck.

698All measurements in flight arrows are highly critical and do not appear ever to
have been determined mathematically. Through the ages it has been entirely a
matter of trial and error in an attempt to produce the most effective design,
though it must be emphasized that, however effective the design of the arrow, a
high degree of perfection in shooting technique is essential to launch it. The
author is entirely right when he states that flight shooting reveals an archer’s
skill or lack of it.

Western archers interested in flight shooting have invariably followed the
Ottoman design in the manufacture of their atrows, firstly, because many are
stili in existence so that their specifi- cations are ascertainable, and
secondly, because their value is well proven, To our knowledge no sectional
fight arrow exists, and no thorough study has ever been made to ascertain the
merits such an arrow may have. Some archers have tried arrows of this kind, but
have discarded them

699as unsuccessful. Since the details of their construction are highly critical,
the reason for their failure could well be that no one has yet succeeded in
making one with the characteristics neces~ sary for sustained flight, which, as
we have seen, depends upon the correctness of pitching-rate.  A careful,
scientifically conducted series of tests could well provide interesting results
even if only to prove that the Ottoman approach with which we are familiar was
better.


4. Atmospheric Conditions

700
Although accorded only a passing reference in our text, atmospheric conditions
are a matter of considerable importance to the flight shooter. Shooting with the
wind naturally reduces drag and is therefore desirable. If at all possible, a
cross-wind should be avoided as it causes the arrow to fly at an angle, and drag
is increased. Since damp air is denser than dry, the latter is obviously
preferable, but whether it is given by a north, south, east, or west wind
depends entirely on geographical situation. Finally, a completely calm
atmosphere without turbulence at any altitude is the ideal. In the areas with
which we are concerned all the conditions most favourable to flight shooting
normally supervene in the early morning and the evening.

Some information on the subject of weather—not universally applicable in all
details because of local climatic variations—may be derived both from Arab
Archery (p. 120) and Mustafa Kani’s Telhis (Isl, XV, Pp. 279-80. Cf. Klopsteg,
pp. 116-17). In the second of the two works attention is drawn. to such factors
as the direction and speed of wind, air currents, and general atmospheric
considerations, and there is some mention of tests to establish their
suitability for shooting. On the Ok Meydanı (below) wind directions accounted
for the existence of seven main flight-shooting ranges which were used according
to the. wind prevailing at the time.

701
ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 109


5. Markers

702
From the earliest days of their cule the Ottomans were accustomed to hold
flight-shooting tournaments on some suitable mayddn, or field. To such an end an
open area to the north of Istanbul was dedicated in perpetuity by decree of
Muhammad II (Mehemmed, or Mehmet, reg.  A.D. 1451-81) and took the name by which
it is still known, viz. Ok Meydam, ‘Arrow Field’. In order to commemorate
distance records, it is usual for the company of archers to erect at the end of
the flight-course stone markers bearing some suitable inscription including the
name of the archer and the distance covered. In each range a ‘mother stone’
marked the first record, in relation to which all subsequent records in that
range were specified (cf. Klopsteg, pp. 117-18).  In Istanbul as recently as
1964 some twenty or thirty specimens measuring on average between five and seven
feet still survived on the Ok Meydani (G. L. Anderson, "Turkish Archery’,
British Archer, vol. 16, Dec.—Jan., 1964-5, pp. 150-51).

The widespread use of markers by the Turks is attested (Hein, Js/., XV,
pp. 244-45) and would seem to date at the very least from the first Mameluke
period, for the Maydan as-Sibag built in Cairo by Baybars I in 666/1267 as the
Maydan al-Qabag ts almost certainly to be understood as a flight-shooting field
and not as “Hippodrome of the Races’ as Ayalon supposes (Scripta, pp. 38-39).
The special marbie columns by which it was distinguished and which remained
there until 780/ 1378—some forty years or so after it had fallen into disuse
because of the gradual encroachment of buildings on its vast empty expanse—are
more compatible with what we know of flight- shooting practice than with
horse-racing, and ‘flight-shooting markers’ seems a much more appropriate
translation of ‘awdmid as-sibdg than Ayalon’s ‘Columns of Racing’, Lest such an
interpretation be doubted, due account should be taken of literary evidence that
in 702/1301-2 Amir Sayf ad-Din Baktüt in this very area established a
flight-shooting record over a distance marked by two marble columns (D!, goa;
D?, 1082). If Ayalon has erred, his error is under- standable since sibág with
the sense ‘flight-shooting’, which it indubitably has in the archer's
vocabulary, is not recorded in the standard dictionaries.

703
6. Flight-shooting Distances


The greatest recorded distance achieved with a hand bow is 972 yards. It was
shot by the Ottoman sultan, Selim III, in 1798 and was witnessed by Sir Robert
Ainslie, British Ambassador to the Porte. The distance is recorded as 1,400
Turkish pikes, and there is some controversy regarding the exact length of the
measure used to determine it. It must, however, be conceded that, even if the
smallest accredited equivalent is taken, 953 yards must be admitted (Klopsteg,
p. 31; this author devotes a whole chapter to distance records, pp. 15-32). This
compares with the modern world record shot in the U.S.A. by H. Drake in June
1967 which stands at 851 yds. 2 ft. 9 in.

704These distances have been exceeded in the U.S.A. with the foot bow, With this
bow the archer lies on his back, feet against the bow, and draws with both
hands. In this way a very powerful bow can be used, In the 1966 California State
Flight Shoot, Harry Drake shot 1,071 yards, which demonstrates that, given the
right equipment, weather conditions, and skill, an arrow can indeed be projected
over almost unbelievable distances.

Such ranges as these must not be confused with what could be achieved by the
same technique in war. E. McEwen (U.K.) has recently demonstrated that a
full-sized, light hunting arrow can be shot over 300 yards with a so-Ib. replica
of a Turkish flight bow. We would therefore expect skilled archers, using
stronger bows, to have been capable of putting down a harassing barrage at about
400 yards, There are three Turkish steel-headed arrows of the kind used for this
purpose in Manchester Museum (Ingo Simon Collection, No. 0.7723).

705Ali old Turkish and modern Western records have been established with short
flight arrows


IIO SARACEN ARCHERY

706
shot by means of a siper, or extended arrow-shelf, Yet great distances have been
covered with long arrows. The Cairene marble columns of which we have already
spoken (above, p. 109) apparently recorded the following feat:


The amir Sayf ad-Din Baktüt shot here in the Hijrah year 702 [1301-2] in the
presence of the Sultan’s Viceroy, Chamberlains, a company of Amirs, and a crowd
of spectators. Using a bow of 31 raris, Damascus weight [126 Ib.], whereof one
limb was strengthened, and an arrow weighing 71 dirhams [ca. 345 gr.] and two
fingers short of a full length [ca. 284 in. long], he covered 1,076 cubits,
Cairo standard [636 yds.], at a time when there was no wind. Arghün then shot
the course and exceeded the distance, but it was disallowed because of the
strength of the bow...

707
So far as wc know at the time of writing, this distance is the longest ever shot
with a long arrow,

There are two other records with which the distance may be compared. The first
is known to us from a third century B.c. inscription from Olbia on the north
coast of the Black Sea, now in Odessa Museum. It reads: ‘I say that the famous
Anaxagoras, son of Demagoras, shot 282 orguias’ (D. J. F. Hill, ‘Grecian and
Other Bow-Shots', in FSAA, vol. 6, 1963, p. 30). This is a distance of about 564
yards. The second comes fro: ‘The Stone of Jenghiz Khan’, a Mongolian inscrip-
tion now in the State Hermitage Museum at Leningrad. It records that in 1224 the
Khan’s nephew, Yisüngkà, shot an arrow over a distance of 335 alda (fathoms)
(W. E. McLeod, ‘The Range of the Ancient Bow’, in Phoenix, vol. 19, 1965,
p. 9). The length of an aida is controversial, but the distance achieved would
appear to have been in the order of 600 yards,

708Generally speaking, the best performance is obtained from a short bow when, as
in the case of the flight bow, it is used with a light arrow projected at high
velocity. A longbow, by contrast, is most effective when used with a heavy atrow
discharged at a lower velocity.


7. The Anecdote

709
The story of the Persian archer is not taken up later as promised. One's first
reaction is to suppose that the man from Nishapur was using equipment that was
not acceptable to ‘orthodox’ flight shooters. The point, however, would seem to
be that an innocent archer carrying a set of the finest flight-shooting
equipment that could be devised at the time was tricked into selling it.  The
purpose of his using an arrow-guide and sectional arrows will be clear from what
we have already said in sections 2 and 3 above. It remains only to remark that
although the two lead beads fitted to the bowstring would in fact fractionally
retard it when loosed, both archers in question—and probably other
contemporaries—were probably under the mistaken impression that a little added
weight was an advantage in that it gave greater thrust to the arrow.
