# On drawing the bow

To draw, the points of grasp in each hand must be tensed, by which is meant, the
little finger, the ring-finger, end the middle finger of both hands. At the same
time both elbows must be tensed. In tensing the right elbow extra care must be
taken because it is of fundamental importance to the achievement of a good
draw.1*

467It is related that a woman once brought a boy of hers to the Imam ash-Shafi'i?
and asked him to teach him archery, to which he assented. ‘He must,’ she said,
“be strong in both fists, quick at both points, and free from both faults.’ She
turned on her heels, and the Imam ash-Shafi quickly rose to pay her respect and
asked her to which family she belonged. She told him that she was descended from
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqais.? ‘You speak the truth,’ he said, ‘This is indeed his
teaching.’

Authorities on archery are agreed that ‘strong in both fists’ refers to the
tensing of the three appropriate fingers of both hands, but they disagree on
what ‘both faults’ are. Some say that they arc rapping (targ) and ‘deflecting
the arrow by! slapping the arrow-pass (tadmik),* though other opinions have been
expressed in abundance, The truth of the matter is that the two faults are
pinching "the nock? (khang)* and rapping, for these are the worst faults in
archery (on faults and their consequences, sce below, Ch. 21. ‘Both points’ are
left unexplained, but they are, we suggest, the nocking-point and the
anchor-point (below, p. 126), the reference being to speed in nocking).

468When ready to draw the bow, tense your elbows and fists, then raise both hands
and elbows until they arc on a level with your shoulders, poised like the beam
of a balance.* Elbows, fists, and shoulders should be like a paper-rule, running
in one straight line so that no one part is higher or lower than another. At all
points the distance from this line to the ground should be the same.  "To repeat
and emphasize,’ the distance from this line to the ground should be one and the
same at all points. This rule is reiterated to impress upon the novice that we
have here a principle that is of fundamental importance to good shooting. All
ancient archers gave their pupils the same advice. ;

Correct use of the right elbow is the essence of a good draw, and maximum
draught is attained when the lobe of the ear is reached. Drawing to the lobe
will enable the archer to determine what the length of his arrow should be. What
he does is to put his back to a wall and bring the arrow to full draw (yastawft
s-sahm) so that both his elbows come in contact with the wall. The draught of
the arrow is then ascertained by noting that point on the shaft which is found
at full draw to lie between the phalanges of the left thumb, for the distance
between that point and the nock will be just the right length for his particular
arrow. No other measurement will meet his needs.  This question of finding the
length of one’s arrow has always been a problem to archers and a subject on
which they have different ideas." For its solution the best teaching ever
expounded is the one I have just described and, in reco ing it, I have explained
a method which men are loath to disclose and which is therefore left unmentioned
by others. !

469It is reported that at-Tabari said, *'Abd ar-Rahm4an al-Faráwi? told me that
there are ten


56

470
ON DRAWING THE BOW 57


points to effective shooting (mikayah), of which nine lie in the attainment of
maximum draught by a properly completed draw and only one in the archer’
(meaning, presumably, that a successful shot largely depends on the completion
of a faultless draw). The completed draw (wafd') is one of three kinds:* the
lesser (bid@yah), the standard (Aifayah), and the greater (mihayah) (below,

471
pp. 123, 127ff).  COMMENT


‘Drawynge well is the best parte of shootynge' (Ascham) -

472
1. The Essentials of the Draw


‘With the performance of the draw the archer, now done with the preliminaries,
enters upon that phase of his shooting which is directly concerned with his
shot. He should draw smoothly and easily with fairly equal distribution of
weight between both arms for ‘to drawe casely and vniformely, that is for to
saye not waggyng your hand, now vpwarde, now downewarde, but alwayes after one
fashion . . . is best both for profit & semelinesse’ (Ascham, p. 105). .

473Since the strength of the draw comes not from the arms, but from the muscles of
the back and shoulders, the archer must, if he is to achieve a powerful draw,
keep his right elbow in the same horizontal plane as his shoulder while
drawing. Once the bow is full-drawn, both arms should support and maintain equal
tension until the arrow is loosed. To draw correctly is of great im- portance,
for a bad draw will almost certainly culminate in a bad shot.


2. Methods of Drawing

474
There are three basic methods of drawing: (2) that whereby the archer with hands
relatively close together at waist height begins simultaneously to push against
the bow, pull on the string, and raise his hands; as the bow moves upwards he
gradually increases the distance between his hands V-wise until the bow is
full-drawn and the arrow horizontal; this technique is favoured by most modern
archers and, so far as can be judged from our text, was our author's method
also; (b) that whereby the archer raises his bow-arm almost fully extended
towards the aiming point with little disturbance of the string until that arm is
level, and then draws; (c) that whereby the archer raises both arms above the
horizontal and draws as he lowers his hands to the correct elevation. This last
method has always been favoured by the Japanese.


3. Creep !

475It is nowadays Western practice to complete the draw and then to hold for
several seconds during which final aim is taken. There is a great danger at this
stage that the arrow will ‘creep’, or nose forward, either because of a slight
bending of the bow-arm or an easing of the shoulders occasioned by muscle
strain. If the arrow does creep, it will not be full-drawn at the moment of —
loosing and will accordingly fall short of the mark. Ascham, doubtless alive to
this danger, advises that *Holdynge must not be longe . . . it must be so lytle
y* it maye be perceyued better in a mans mynde when it is done, than seene w' a
mans eyes when it is in doyng’ (p. 105).
