# On standing before the target

than can be achieved by squatting, and it has the additional advantage of being
easier for the learner. There are four kinds of stance lof which three are
designed for target shooting and vary accordingly as the archer!’ stands
squarely to the mark (mutawajjih kathir^") or in a position of acute obliquencss
(munharif shadid?*) or in an intermediate position (snutawassiz) between these
two extremes (Fig. 45). Lastly, there is a stance to suit the archer’s needs in
combat and flight shooting.

668A learner should take up a slightly oblique stance before the mark and set the
latter in line with his left eye. Keeping his left knee straight and pointing
the toes of his left foot directly towards the mark, he should plant his right
foot in a transverse position with the left heel pointing in the direction of
his right instep (bayád). With sufficient space between his two feet to accom-
modate the length of the bone of the forearm he should put his weight ( ya'
tamid) on the right foot and ease (yukhiff) his left.

Using an alternative method, he can place the left foot in a transverse position
so that its little toe is opposite the mark and plant the right foot lengthwise
with its big toe pointing directly at the mark.

669"There is yet another method. In this case the archer sets the mark" in line
with his left shoulder and stands with both feet firmly planted in the
transverse position. There should be no great gap between the two feet—only a
span, or even less than that. This is Tahir’s method.


The Military Stance?

670
In this position the archer has his Achilles’ tendons meeting, but parts his
feet in front. He stands in this way because he is wearing armour. It is a
difficult thing to do, "and I do not care for it’, but I record it here in
accordance with the practice of our masters, My own view is that the archer
should put a space between his legs almost big enough to allow another man to
pass between. In this way he can stand more firmly and can get up, stand, and
dodge? more rapidly.

In battle you can put your shield over your forearm, fasten it to it, and
advance on the enemy sideways. When you eventually reach the spot where his
arrows are falling, you drop on your knees with head down and hands on the
ground and rotate your shield‘ over your head so that if the enemy shoots at
you, none of his arrows will hit you. If one should hit, it will strike your
shield.  If you are able to shoot at the enemy and so wish, you can nock and
draw in that position without casting so much as a glance at him before bringing
the arrow to full draw. You then raise your head, sight, and shoot. This is a
very convenient manœuvre when one is engaged in siege opera- tions against
fortresses, cities, and the like. à

671
IOI


102 SARACEN ARCHERY COMMENT

672
Strict adherence to the Arabic text would require our chapter to be entitled ‘On
Standing and Sitting Before the Target’, but, as none of the MSS of the A group
deals with the second of these two subjects, we have excluded ‘and Sitting’ from
our English title. The subject will be taken up in section 2 below.


1. Standing

673
The oblique, frontal, and intermediate positions are discussed in Arab Archery,
pp. 81-84, where they are said to have been the positions of Abū Hashim, Tahir,
and Ishaq, respectively:

(a) The position of acute obliqueness, Known in Great Britain and the United
States as the sideways position, this is quite rightly said to permit a longer
and more powerful draw. The bow arm can be fully extended, and the unrestricted
use of the back- and shoulder-muscles permits the application of maximum
strength. It enabled the oriental archer discharging his arrow from the right of
his bow to hold a shield while shooting. This important advantage resulting from
the use of the thumb-lock would be denied to users of the three-finger method as
practised in the West, for the arrow leaving the bow from the [eft would have to
pass between bow and shield with resulting interference from the latter. To
shoot with a shield was perhaps not as simple for the Oriental as one might
suppose. Of the various types of shield in use in the Middle Ages, that most
current in the area with which are concerned was too deeply concave on the
inside to permit both the grip of the shield and the handle of the bow to be
held in one hand without some kind of supporting device. To overcome the
difficulty, the archer's most practical approach would have been to slide his
forearm through the shield's grip and to support it by means of a shield-strap,
or guige. This would have been fastened to two of the four rings which one
normally finds inside the boss and then hung around the neck to afford
additional Support against the rim. The guige need have been nothing more than a
silk scarf. Such an expedient was used by mounted warriors as a means of
carrying a shield when not in use. (For helpful advice in this matter we are
indebted to H. R. Robinson of H.M. Tower of London Armouries.)

674(b) The frontal position. The advantages of this position were said by its
advocates to lie in increased accuracy and the fact that it permitted the user
to wear a coat or two of mail which would crowd the tip of the bow if shot in
the oblique position, Although the author of Arab Archery concedes its merits
for a near target, trick-shooting, and weak bows, he warns his readers that it
will shorten one’s draw, weaken one’s shot, and not allow the use of a shield.

(c) The intermediate position. This is said to combine the advantages of the
other two without having the disadvantages of either. It is advocated as the
best standing position for warfare and

675
other purposes, 2. Sitting

In the terminology of Arabic-speaking archers ‘sitting’ (julüs) seems to denote
almost any posture that is not standing or lying, In many contexts it is best
translated as ‘squatting’.

676As in the case of standing, the positions could be oblique, frontal, or
intermediate. Four different seats are described in the chapter on sighting in
MSS of the -C group (C!, 482-b; C?, 78b-79a; C*, 40a-b; cf. D1, 36a; D?,
62a). They are:

(a) The sprinter's seat (jalsat al-hárib). The archer bends his right knee, digs
it into the ground to take his weight (D: and sits on his foot). His left shank
he keeps erect (D: but bent slightly over to the right). It is Abii Hashim’s
method and was that of most of the ancients and the Persians. It may be used the
opposite way round, It is a good position that is suitable for users of a strong
bow or novices.

677
ON STANDING BEFORE THE TARGET 103


(b) The fencer’s seat (jalsat al-muthàgif). The archer rests on his ieft shank
which is raised but with the knee pointing towards the ground. He keeps his
right erect. The feet are kept apart the length of the bone of the forearm or
less, and his weight is distributed between the two.

678(c) Innominate. The archer squáts on his raised feet, ankles together. The
shanks remain erect. It is suitable for persons with deep chests or persons
using the oblique position. Most archers use it, and it is convenient for a man
in armour,

(d) The kings’ seat (jalsa al-mulük). This is described as a ‘square seat’
(jalsah murabba'ah), meaning that the user is square to the target and not
sideways. It could, perhaps, mean *cross- legged’—as interpreted, it would seem,
in Arab Archery, p. 85. It is suitable for men with deep chests, for
trick-shooting, and for use with a light bow.

679The foregoing postures are described in more or less the same terms by the
author of Arab Archery, who interestingly remarks that (c) was used by most
archers in Khorasan and Egypt, and that (b) was the posture adopted by most
Andalusian archers (pp. 84-85).
