# On sighting

Sight the target outside the bow from the back of the hand. What constitutes the
outside of the bow is a controversial point. Some say that to sight outside the
bow means setting your sight along the arrow and that to sight inside the bow is
to sight from the back of the hand because it lies between the bow and the
archer. The correct understanding of the term is as stated ‘in the opening
sentence of this paragraph! because the inside of the bow is the space between
the bow and its string. So, properly speaking, internal sighting will be that
which is carried out by means of the arrowhead (i.c. as seen between the bow and
the string), and to draw conclusions on the subject from a picture of Bahram Gir
‘as some who take the contrary view do! is of little use, because a picture on a
wall or in a book is not large enough to show such detail (on these forms of
sighting, see Fig. 24 and below, pp. 61-62).

478External sighting can be done in three ways. In one of these you look askance
with both eyes as described above, By a second variation the arrowhead lies
outside the bow in line with the mark, while the archer looks at the mark with
both eyes and aims with the left. He then rapidly . snatches the arrow (below,
p. 64) and releases. Thirdly, he can train the arrowhead on the mark outside the
bow. In this case he uses his left eye to aim and keeps his right on the dustár
of the bow without using it to sight any part of the mark, keeping the knuckles
of the left hand in line with the centre of the mark.

You can also sight by split vision. This is done by training the arrowhead on
the mark with the left eye outside the bow and coming into focus by directing
your right eye on to the mark from inside the bow. Never take your right eye off
the arrowhead or your left from the mark at which the arrow is to be loosed.

479You may adopt a variation of this method as follows.! First, you use both eyes
to train the arrow on the mark outside the bow. Then, when only one-third of the
arrow remains to be



480

l Fic. 24. AIMING i ; (2). Aiming ‘inside’ the bow. d (b). Aiming ‘outside’ the
bow.

481
60 SARACEN ARCHERY


drawn and the arrowhead disappears from sight "behind the bow,! you keep the
left eye trained on the mark and with the right watch inside the bow for the
arrowhead to come on to your hand.  When the arrowhead is as far back as it can
go at full draw, you release, This is an excellent method and is, furthermore,
the most accurate and the least confusing of all. Those who practise the
technique adopt a squatting position between the square and oblique postures,

482
iv

Some archers gauge elevation and direction (wazana) from the beginning of the
draw and make continual adjustments until the moment of release. What you do in
this case is to train the arrowhead on to the mark, gauge precisely, and draw,
training your sight along the left forearm with both elbows evenly and correctly
balanced. This is Tahir’s method. Alternatively, you can sight the mark first
and, when you have drawn half the arrow, gauge precisely and at that instant
bring the arrow to full draw and release, This is a more careful method. Others
only gauge at the end. In other words, elevation and direction are not precisely
gauged (Là yatahaggag al-wazn) ) at the beginning of the draw. On the contrary,
the archer waits and, when a fist’s length of the arrow remains to be drawn, he
holds for a moment, sights, and then, snatching rapidly, releases.  This is the
military technique, and it is of far greater value than any of those already
described,

483You may also gauge by taking the process right through from the moment you begin
to draw until full draw is reached, but then giving a quick release, This is an
excellent method for target shooting, but it is best to accustom oneself to
military techniques.


v

484
To hit an enemy at some distance away, aim at his head "by elevating the upper
limb of the bow, for an arrow loses height on its way to the mark, "If aimed in
this way, however,! it will find its way into your adversary and kill him. To
get your arrow into an enemy at close range, en the other hand, you should aim
for his leg "because in the first stage of its flight after leaving the bow an
arrow gains height. You can in this way make allowances for different distances
between the two extremes, Some archers say that if you cover your opponent with
your left fist and shoot, you will kill him, but this is only true if one is at
a certain specified distance. Archers hold different opinions about the angle of
ascent and velocity of an arrow. Judgement and Jength of experience, however,
are the only real means of obtaining the best results,

All that we have said so far depends for its success on a steady left hand, a
firm hold on the grip, correct locking, alignment of both arms, correct
sighting, presence of mind, a sound draw with the ‘right! elbow in the
appropriate position, a clean release with tension in both elbows and, above
all—for on this hi everything else—imperturbability.

485
COMMENT


It goes without saying that the ability to aim is essential to accurate
shooting. Although it becomes intuitive with ience, the art is not easily
acquired and is indeed unattainable until and unless the archer has complete
control of his bow, Methods of aiming in Islamic manuals are numerous to the
exhaustion of almost all possibilities, The individual, therefore, had to make
choice of method. ‘To some extent at least, his choice would appear to have been
dictated by the size and design of his bow; for the doctrine that all sighting
should be ‘external’ was, we are told, that of the users of the short
Khorasanian bow, while the view that it should be all ‘internal’ was held by
archers who used the ‘average longer bow’ (Tabsirak, 65a). The method selected

486
ON SIGHTING 61


would also depend to. some degree on factors such as style and kind of shooting
(target, hunting, war, etc.).

487It is more than likely that the range of methods known to Taybugh4 was far
greater than the foregoing chapter may suggest. If he appears sparing with his
knowledge, it is because of his concern with the needs of the warrior. Detetred,
we suspect, by his intensely practical mind from burdening his readers with
confusing prolixity, he restricts himself to what he personally regards as
essential information. It is our intention, in commenting on what he has to say,
to follow his example and to resist the temptation to assemble a wealth of
material which, however interesting it may be, would only bewilder the general
reader.


I. Monocular and Binocular Sighting

488
Modern teaching, like that of Taybughi, favours the use of both eyes in aiming,
but neverthe- less allows the closing of one if the archer finds the binocular
method too difficult.

To the hunter, binocular vision is very necessary for judging range, for if one
eye were to be closed throughout the draw, i itis probable that errors in
elevation would result. We can, therefore, safely assert that what is applicable
in the case,of the hunter in this respect would be equally applicable in the
case of the combatant archer.

489‘The 'askant', or ‘squinting’, method of binocular aiming of which Taybugha
thinks so highly is mentioned by the author of Arab Archery (p. §3) who does not
however share his enthusiasm for it: ‘This type of aiming ... by some is
supposed to be the best... In the opinion of the author, however, it is the
worst and most faulty and possesses the greatest margin of error; for if the
archer should close one eye and open the other and aim with it by sighting
obliquely, and then should close the eye which he had left open and open the one
which was closed and should aim with it, he would realize that the aim of the
two eyes in this position is never the same.  How, then, could aim taken by this
method be accurate?” Taybughà, however, to whom this method was obviously
suited, does not assert its universal value. In fact, he clearly confines it to
persons with ‘equality of vision in both eyes’.


2. Sighting from the Side of the Bow

490
Under fit esc ee GIGEOREOHUH. witha Se: Tarea eect OF eld ee piper aite enti
which is related to range.

In his explanation of what is meant by the ‘outside’ and the ‘inside’ of the bow
Taybughà agrees with the author of Arab Archery, who defines the latter as ‘the
side toward your right . .  : along which the arrow passes at the time of
release’, and the former as ‘the other side which is toward your left’ (p. 52).

491Given an arrow that is matched to the bow and its user and will therefore travel
in the direc- tion in which it is pointing the moment it is loosed, the line of
aim may vary laterally according to three basic techniques which call for some
explanation:


(a) External sighting (an-nazar al-khárij or min kharij al-qazos).

492When the arrow is drawn to the ear or thereabouts, its tail, or nock, is
displaced to dis tight of the line of sight as given by the right eye. This
displacement is roughly equal to the width of the bow (Fig. 25). This being so,
the left edge of the bow must, for an accurate shot, be seen in line with the
target. To aim in this way is, according'to our author's terminology, to aim
‘outside the bow’. (Fig. 24 b.)

This method admitted of variations, and the same three variations as are
mentioned by Taybugha are described in more or less detail in Arab Archery,
p. 53. There the author attributes Taybugha’s third variation—his own personal
preference and that in which the

493
62 SARACEN ARCHERY


archer keeps his right eye on the dustár and blind to the target—to Aba
Hashim. All three variations—‘in universal use among the kings of Persia’—are
declared suitable for archers using the oblique posture, whether seated,
standing, mounted, or in armour, and are pronounced ‘very effective because of
the length of the draw that is used in them’ (ibid., pp. 53-54). TTA | (b)
Internal sighting (an-nagar ad-dakhil, or min dakhil al-qaws). .  When the arrow
is drawn to the chin or between lip and chin its nock should Hie in the vertical
plane immediately beneath the right eye, and the line of sight thus run along
the line of the shaft. It follows that, in this case, it is the right edge of
the bow that must be aligned with the target. The archer will then be aiming
‘inside the bow’. (Fig. 242.)  Viewing the target according to this method is
treated in Arab Archery, p. 54, bat, to judge from the author’s comments, it had
obvious disadvantages as a military technique.  Hence, no doubt, the absence of
any mention of it by Taybugha.  (c) External-internal sighting (gismat
al-'aynayn, ‘division of the eyes’).  When the arrow is drawn to, or near, the
right-hand corner of the mouth (Le. to an intermediate position), aim must be
taken between the two last and is achieved by the use of both eyes. : Both forms
of the ‘split-vision’ technique mentioned in our text are dealt with by us
author of Arab Archery, pp. 54-55. Expressing himself more clearly and in
somewhat guises, teria ur OE ior s rie a ee grip on & level with his nose, align
the arrowhead with the target, and focus his sight on both with the left eye
from outside the bow and with the right from the inside. Drawing horizontally at
the level of his lips until all but a fist’s width remains, he should complete
his draw with a sudden jerk and release. The method is ascribed to Ishq. The
second technique, we are told, is said to be more accurate than any other, and
this is Taybughà's view, as we have scen,

494
Line of sight -


< E eem Bow — >

495
A point not to be overlooked is that if the left eye is the master eye and the
archer shoots right-handedly, the bow must be displaced weil to the right of the
target to compensate for the distance between the left eye and the nock of the
arrow. -

The Japanese draw roughly as far back as the point of the right shoulder and
consider that the ideal aim is achieved with the left edge of thé bow running
through the centre of the target. If this cannot be done, the bow may be
displaced either to the right co that the target may be viewed well to the left
of the bow, or to the left so that the target is obscured by the bow as viewed
by the right eye (Acker, Japanese Archery, pp. 65-67).

496
3. Gauging Elevation and Direction __ In Arab Archery, pp. 55-56, Taybugha’s
first two techniques are viewed as two variations of the ‘method used by archers
who faced the target directly.  His third technique, on the other hand, is given
as one of two variations of the method used by archers who faced the target
obliquely. It is recommended for warfare on the gtounds that the


ON SIGHTING 63

497
bow could be concealed from the enemy while most of the draw was being
made. When the arrowhead was a fist’s width away from full draw, it could be
turned on the enemy. The second variation—not mentioned by Taybughá—differed
only from the first in that atm was taken not only when the arrow had been drawn
to within a fist’s width from its head, but also at the very

of the draw. Taybughá does not appear, however, to have shared the view that it
was the ‘best method and . . . suitable for all purposes’.
