# The systems of the great masters of archery

i The system of Abii Hashim was as follows. When bracing the bow, he would put
the matn of the grip in the middle of the left palm and place the siyah of the
leg of his bow under the toes of his left foot. His right palm he would apply to
the neck of the bow along with the bowstring and give one push so that the loop
would fall into the nock. He would incline the bow on account of the slope of
the neck (i.e. he held the bow at the slant and not vertically, the degree of
inclina- tion depending on the slope of the neck).

He used the position of acute obliqueness so as to put the mark directly in line
with his left shoulder and sighted with both eyes outside (i.e. to the left of)
the bow, for he was tall of stature,” ong-nec ked, long in the forearm, and
long-fingered. He used the square grasp and, when gripping, would place the matn
of the bow in the middle creases of the little finger, ring-finger, and middle
finger of his Jeft hand and in the distal crease of his index finger, with the
ibranjak of the bow tucked into a point the width of two fingers away from his
wrist-bone.

815The nock ( fag) of the arrow he would place in the distal crease of his right
index finger and middle finger and support the notch (kaz) with the pad of his
thumb. He would push the shaft forward with his right hand and bring back his
left so that nocking took place at a point between his "left! nipple and his
liver (i.e. in the area of the navel).! When locking, he would place the
bowstring in the distal crease of his thumb and fasten. his thumb on the middle
finger. His right index finger would be loosely on the thumb with its tip
outside (i.e. to the right of) the bowstring.

He would use the lesser draw (wafa’ biddyah) and draw the shaft on to the tuft
of hair between his lips and chin, keeping all (ic. hands, shoulders, and elbow)
in a straight line in the same horizontal plane (‘ald khat; al-tstiva’). Upon
loosing, he would follow through with a forward and downward thrust of his bow
hand and complete the movement by striking his shoulder- blade with the siyah of
his bow (see frontispiece; the archer right centre has just completed the
movement), By doing this an archer can determine the length of the bow ‘in
relation to the length of his arm’. With his right hand he would give a full
twist ( farkah; above, p. 66) so that his right index finger would come to rest
beneath the lobe of the ear.

816
Hi


Tahir al-Balkhi's system was the reverse of Abū Hashim’s because he was short
"with a short armspan!,s short fingers, a plump hand, short neck, big beard, and
wide chest. He squatted in the frontal position and placed the mark in line with
his collar-bone, using the oblique grasp. The matn of his bow he set in the
proximal crease of his little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger of the left
hand and in the middle crease of the index finger, with the ibranjak of his bow
tucked in to a point one finger’s width away from his wrist-bone. When nocking,
he would dispose the

817
130


THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS OF ARCHERY 131

818
nock of his arrow in the same manner as that already described above. When
locking, he would place the bowstring in the distal crease of the right thumb
and, having fastened the tip of the thumb on the middle finger, lay the index
finger gently on the thumb with the finger-tip inside the bowstring. He would
draw on io his cheek in the wafa’ bayad position (p. 128) and hold his left hand
still. He would bring his right thumb into a position beneath the lobe of his
ear with his finger outside it (i.e. the lobe), and, had a drop of moisture
dripped from the sky, it would not have gone down berween® the thumb and right
index finger. The loose was accomplished without formation of the crescent with
thumb and index finger (taklil; p. 64) or forward and downward thrust as he
followed through. The movement would have been incompatible with his position
directly facing the mark. Because of the shortness of his neck and the size of
his beard, Tahir sighted with both eyes together inside the bow.



819

a. Square b. Intermediate c. Oblique

820
Fria, 45. METHODS OF TRE MASTERS Copied from British Museum MS Or. 9838,
fols. 16a~I7a.


i

821
The system of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ was a compromise between the two methods already
described, for he was of medium build and would squat in a position between that
of acute obliqueness and the frontal. What he did was to bring the target’ in
line with part of his collar-bone. When grasping, he would place the marn of the
grip between the proximal and middle creases, right in


` the centre of the proximal phalanges at the base of the three lower fingers of
his left hand, and in

822
the distal crease of his index finger, tucking the ibranjak in to a point one
and a half fingers away from the wrist-bone. He used to place the bowstring in
the distal phalanx of the thumb and mount the right index finger gently on the
thumb with its tp on the string itself, so that the line of the string would
bisect the tip of the index finger. He would draw on his mouth and come to full
draw in the misdh® s-sawad position (? m. bayad; above, p. 129). He would
snatch* and with half the full movement follow through ‘with a forward and
downward thrust of the bow-hand? and half twist with the other to bring the
finger-nail of the right index finger into position under the lobe of his ear.


132 SARACEN ARCHERY iv Because of his desire to develop a suitable technique,
at-Tabari ‘who was trained in all three systems! ° squatted in the same way as
Ishaq, adopted Tahir’s grasp, braced and sighted after the fashion of Abii
Hashim, used a lock that was a compromise between that of Tahir and that of

823
Ishaq and drew on the mouth after the manner of Ishaq . . .!? At-Tabari is the
author of the Kitab al-idah (for K. al-wadih, “The Clear Book’).


COMMENT 1. The Schools of Archery

824
From a comparison of some of the more important treatises relevant to the
subject it is apparent—and certain of our observations on preceding chapters
will have led the reader to suspect as much—that, in Islamic archery literature
generally, there are discrepant versions of the teachings of Abū Hashim, Tahir,
and Ishaq. In particular, the account of their systems contained in the
foregoing chapter is at variance with that of at-Tabari as transmitted in his
Kita al-wadih (26a-46b; Ist., 19b-34b), which, incidentally, as the source of
many of the ascriptions appearing in Arab Archery, accounts for some points of
difference between that work and this,

Familiarity with the technical literature and an awareness of the Islamic
predilection for a personal originator of almost any teaching or doctrine
combine to make us highly sceptical of the authenticity of ascriptions which the
absence of objective criteria makes it difficult or impossible to control. The
emergence of personal schools of archery, we suspect, represents the
organization of teaching into a coherent system, in which names enjoying the
sanction of tradition are used either to legitimize current practice or to
promulgate new methods. That Abi Hashim, Tahir, and Ishaq were historical
persons, we have no reason to doubt, but whether any of them was the real
originator of a technique or system, or merely the leading exponent of a
technique or system as taught and practised in a given geographical area at a
given time-~and this is not unlikely— is just one of the questions for which we
have, as yet, no positive answer.

825In our treatise these three Great Masters emerge as ideal specimens of two
physical extremes and a golden mean and, as such, seem no more than a
methodological convenience for an exposi- tion of the author's teaching. In the
Wadih, on the other hand, it is deducible from the systems ascribed to them that
none of them was a perfect example of such physical types. On this and other
grounds it is legitimate to surmise that their somatic differences were not so
absolute as portrayed in aftertimes and were indeed of less consequence than one
might be led to suppose.

While physical characteristics are of evident importance to some facets of
shooting technique— the nature of one's grasp, for instance—they are by no means
the whole story. It must be remem- bered that from ancient times the archer in
combat more often than not protected his person with armour which, to a greater
or lesser degree according to its nature, added to his bulk or deprived him of
the unrestricted use of his body, or both, To illustrate, let us consider the
helmet.  Many of the earlier surviving specimens of Turkish and Persian helmets
are equipped with nasals, or nose-bars, that could be slid up or down in their
fittings and locked in the desired position by means of a threaded bolt (Stone,
Glossary of Arms and Armor, s.v. Armor, pp. 36-51, and figs. 50-58, 61-64). A
nasal might extend down the face as far as the wearer’s chin, and, when shooting
a bow in an acutely oblique position like that of Abü Hashim, the archer would
not have been able to turn his head in comfort more than about forty-five
degrees towards the target. If his drawing hand was in contact with the side of
his face as he loosed, it is difficult to see how the string could avoid
catching the nasal and ruining the shot, to say nothing of any other
inconvenience or injury that might result if his head was turned too much. He
might, of

826
Ao OLoA DMA Uf LI1D URLAL MASILEKS Ur AKUREKY 133


course, remove the nasal or Jock it in the raised position, but he could not
always count on having the opportunity of doing so. Similar problems could
obviously arise from the wearing of armour, be it plate or mail, and both the
Wadi and Arab Archery leave us in no doubt that the Muslim archers of the Middle
East recognized its importance as a factor in the choice of posture (e.g. Wadih,
34a-b, 39b-402, 45b-46b; Arab Archery, pp. 81 ff.). Tahir’s adherents, we are
told, rejected Abū Hashim's position of acute obliqueness because of the
string’s liability to catch protrusive items of armour. To face the target
directly, on the other hand, had in their view the advantage of eliminating this
hazard and at the same time not restricting the archer to one coat of mail
(zardiyyah). It did not, however, permit, as did Abū Hashim’s position, the use
of the kind of shield with which Khorasanians were wont to protect themselves
while actually shooting, nor did it admit of a powerful draw. Both these
disadvantages could be overcome by the use of the intermediate position. In view
of Taybughà's emphasis on archery in warfare it is surprising that he says
nothing of such considerations, for they must have been of greater importance
than physique as witness the fact that today most Western archers, regardless of
build, stand sideways to the target.

827With the crystallization of theoretical teaching into three systems at-Tabari,
it would seem, came face to face with the obvious problem of the individual who
fell neatly into none of the three stereotyped classes of physique for which the
systems catered. His solution was simple and



828

Fig. 46. SHOOTING WHEN WEARING A HELMET Note tahlil and kharrah.

829
94 )4&ASAR deed ALANA LAM L


characteristic of the Islamic way of thinking. Skilfully avoiding innovation
which could well discredit him, he reconciled the claims of individuality with
those of ‘orthodoxy’ and tradition by the application of the eclectic
principle. In so doing he satisfied an obvious need and set a useful example,
thereby earning himself recognition as a Master—in the sense of founder of a
school—in his own right. :

830The four schools, or systems (madhahib), of archery based on allegiance to the
teaching of a Master (imám) are strikingly reminiscent of the four orthodox
schools (madhahkib) of Islamic law, each perpetuating the doctrine of a Master
(idm) and his disciples. Since the systems of our text are, as already
indicated, not those described by at-Tabari, we may well suspect that the
respectable framework of orthodoxy underpinned by time-honoured names is being
used as a cloak for the promulgation of what is either the author's own teaching
or teachings reflecting current practice.


2. At-Tabari’s Technique

831
If we discount the misleading matter of discrepant ascriptions, the practice of
at-Tabari as laconically recorded in our text does not, so far as the record
goes, fundamentally diverge from that described in the Wadik (59a-62b; Ist.,
452-48b). The only major difference concerns his grasp on the bow which
was.,from what he himself says, intermediate and not oblique as stated
above. Although the two MSS do not wholly agree, that of Istanbul being more
corrupt than that of the British Museum, we nevertheless venture the following
account of his methods:


"Whether standing or squatting, I prefer to take a slightly oblique position and
set the target in line with my left eye. In this I follow the system of Ishaq
ar-Raffa’. When bracing, the middle phalanges of my left index finger and middle
finger are in contact with my right knee. When nocking, I first set the notches
(alag at-taftoig/al-fuvág) of my arrows on the middle phalanx of my middle
finger and firmly hold the bottom of the notches with the tips of my thumb and
index finger. I next push the arrow sharply forward until the string strikes the
base of my thumb and index finger without at any time allowing the shaft (badan)
of my arrow to leave the string. Then, without looking, I bring the nock back,
slip it on the string, and Iock ‘63’.  Lodging the string in the crease of my
thumb, I have my index finger on top of the thumb and the string opposite the
mid-point of the very tip of the index finger. In the lock, I have the cusps
(daffatáni, sing. daffah) of the nock between the proximal phalanx and middle
crease of my index finger. In this I follow the system of Tahir al-Balkhi.

832In grasping the bow, I set the marn (above, p. 45) of the grip between the
crease formed at the base of the four fingers and the middle crease thereof. In
this I follow the system of Abū Hashim, The upper end of the grip’s belly
(ibranjak) I place between the two phalanges [ sic; it must be ‘joints’] of my
thumb in conformity with Tahir’s teaching, and the lower part one finget's width
from the wrist-bone in accordance with that of Ishiq.

When aiming, I displace the lower siyah to the right and bring it back to
vertical with a twist of my forearm at the very moment I begin to draw, and in
this I follow Tahir. Using my bow-hand to focus, I direct the tip of my
arrowhead (ra’s an-nagl) on to the centre of the mark.  I aim with both eyes
together outside the bow and, in sighting, I depend essentially on my right eye,
though I use it in conjunction with my left. In this I follow Ishaq. I do not
lower my left arm for short range, nor do I raise it for long, On the contrary,
the proximal phalanx of my left thumb will be in line with the end of my
shoulder throughout the draw and remain absolutely level, moving neither upwards
for long range nor downwards for short.

833In drawing, I execute one uninterrupted movement, as taught by Tahir, and bring
back my arrow directly in line with the parting dividing my lips with no
deviation either upwards or downwards, as taught by Isháq. When the arrowhead
reaches the ibranjak, I pause for the

count of one or two for as long as it takes [reading b1-gadr (Ist.) for ba'd]
for the arrow to settle

834
THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS OF ARCHERY 135


and be trained on the mark. I then take my hand from the string to a point in
line with my shoulder, and, at that very moment of loosing, I disengage with a
twist of the hand (farkah) and without too sharp a pull on the string lest my
index finger catch any part of the nock or shaft. I throw out my chest and left
arm until the ends of my shoulder-blades meet. In this I follow Tahir...’

835
