# On nocking

One way of taking up the arrow prior to nocking, which is the second
fundamental, is to take hold of it-—nock towards the elbow! *—with the palm and
‘all five! * fingers of the right hand as if you were taking hold of a
stave. This is a Turkish method of taking up an arrow (maskah Turkiyyah). An
accomplished archer will take hold of the shaft with the middle finger, thumb,
and index finger, and have the arrowhead in front of the ends of his
fingers. The arrow in this case is held at a point two-thirds Tof the distance
from the head!, the remaining third coming up towards the forearm through the
centre of the groove formed between the right index finger and thumb. "The
effect will be that of a scribe taking hold of a pen.!*

Of these two methods, the first is more convenient, reliable, and practical for
the archer, especially if the arrow is to be drawn from a quiver (Plate
16). Hold the arrow in position with the fingers of your left hand, In other
words, hold the shaft with the left thumb, index finger, and middle finger
against the grip of the bow. Some people call this the ‘clinging lock’ (‘agd
al-luzüm) of the left band on the arrow (Fig. 22 f).

425Take the nock of the arrow in the three appropriate fingers--the thumb, index
finger, and middle finger of the right hand—and, while nocking, keep your eyes
on your foe. Now nocking is the operation of fitting the arrow’s notch to the
string, this notch being termed the fug of the arrow or the Adz (see, however,
pp. 130, 138), which is a Turkish word (i.e. gez}. The operation should be
carried out in the following manner. "Once the arrow is held in place against
the grip’, you should run your fingers over the stele (badan as-sahm) to see
whether there is any break or fault in your shaft "such as splits or splinters
which may injure the left thumb!.* You continue to run your fingers along it in
this way until the nock of the arrow finds its way into the centre



426

FIG. 2r, NOCKING ; 2). Running the shaft forward against the string.  ). — b.

427
MA


48 SARACEN ARCHERY

428
of the middle phalanges of the middle finger and index finger and the proximal
margin of the distal phalanx of the thumb, Then, ‘with fingers pressing on the
nack,! you give ‘the end of the shaft! one shove with the right hand and bring
back the left "which is holding the bow! without allowing the string ‘against
which the arrow is running! to leave the stele until the string “comes in under
the thumb and'5 rides just clear of the nock (Fig. 21). You then move both hands
back (i.e. in the direction from which they came) and slip the string into the
nock, still keeping your eyes on your foc. In other words, at no time do you
look at the nocking operation, but rather keep your eyes fixed all the while on
the mark at which you are about to shoot, that is to say, the: enemy's
position. (It cannot be overemphasized that! your sight must be trained
constantly upon this mark without leaving it even for a single instant, for if
an archer takes his attention away from his foe, the Jatter will do him some
injury and perhaps even kill him. All archers must put in a good deal of
practice until their eyes get accustomed to being used in this way and the
operation becomes a natural function." ; The business of nocking that has just
been described should be executed with rapidity, which can only be acquired by
repeating the operation time after time. Only constant practice will bring the
experience required by the technique, for to nock speedily without looking at
the operation is difficult and can only be achieved by repeated practice and
constant training.


COMMENT

429
Nocking is treated, to a greater or lesser extent, by different authors in
different ways. Here is not the place to assemble all the material we have
discovered on the subject and to enter into a comparative study. One or two
points, however, do call for some comment, and for this purpose Arab Archery may
be used to most advantage, It should be noted that, in order to avoid vexatious
repetition of references, it is to pp. 40-42 of this work that we refer,


1. Taking Hold of the Arrow

430
(a) The ‘Turkish’ method. (Cf. Wadih, 42a; Hein, Isl, XV, p. 76; Klopsteg,
p. 96.) This is identical with that said in Arab Archery to have been advocated
by the school of Tahir al-Balkhi.  It was ‘easier than other methods and a
speedier way of drawing an arrow from the quiver when in hot pursuit of game or
an adversary’ (C1, 39b-40a; C2, 65b-66a; C*, 32a). Hence its appeal to Taybugh4,
the exponent of military techniques.

(b) The ‘pen’ method. (Cf. Wadih, loc. cit.) This is identical with that said in
Arab Archery to have been advocated by the school of Abii Hashim. Taybugha omits
to indicate that the little finger and ring-finger were folded into the palm. .

431‘There is no mention in our treatise of the method said in Arad Archery to have
been preferred by the school of Ishaq (cf. Wadih, loc. cit.). This consisted in
picking up the arrow with the index finger and the middle finger at one span’s
distance away from the arrowhead just as a bird would pick up a piece of straw
in its beak. It is ignored by our author presumably because it had no place in
combat. : ;


2. Supporting the Arrow at the Grip

432
On this point the author of Arab Archery is more informative than Taybughā and
offers two basic methods. The archer could either (a) place the arrow at one
fist’s distance from its head between the left thumb, index finger, and middle
finger which had already been released from the grip for that purpose, or (b)
keep the said three fingers closed on the grip until the right and left hands
came together, at which moment he would open them (ie. the left fingers) and put
a.


ON NOCKING 49

433
*38’ lock on the arrow at one span from the head while running his right hand
over the remainder of the stele as far as the nock to detect any faults there
might be in his shaft. This second method is said to have been that of Tahir’s
school. From careful reading of the text it would seem to have differed from the
first only in two points, viz. the manner in which the fingers took the arrow,
and the distance at which the stele was held from the head. In MSS of the C
group mention is made only of the left index finger and thumb in this connexion
(C1, 40a; C4, 66a; C}, 32b).


3. The Position of the Nock against the Fingers

434
According to Arab Archery, the nock prior to insertion of the string into the
notch should rest against the fingers in one of three positions, which differ
fractionally from those given by Taybugha. They are, however, worth mentioning
if only to illustrate the wide divergence of opinion on the subject. After
running his hand down the stele the archer could hold the nock (a) between the
index finger and the thumb with the notch against the distal phalanx of the
middle finger (Abi Hashim), or (b) with the middle phalanx of the index finger,
the fore part of the thumb, and the tip of the middle finger (Tahir), or (c)
between the index finger and thumb with the notch between the first two
phalanges of the middle finger (Ishàq). E


a 4. Insertion of the String

435
Two basic methods are advocated in Arab Archery, When the stele is against the
string the archer may (a) quickly and forcefully push the arrow forward and
bring the nock back on to the string (Abü Hashim), or (b) push forward without
clearing the string and then open the fingers to nock as soon as string and nock
make contact (Tahir, Ishaq). >


5. The Nocking-point This is the part of the bowstring to which the nock of the
arrow is set. Since it tends to be taken for granted by many Islamic authors it
is worth while to note the following remarks (D!, 28b;

436
D3, 57a-b).


‘The nocking-point (snazodi* at-tafwig) on the string should be directly in line
with the arrow- pass (majrd s-sahm min gabdat al-gaws), being a little higher if
the mark is at close range and a little lower for shooting at long range. If one
nocks low, the arrow will fly beyond the target, which is a desirable thing in
flight shooting or when shooting at a man in armour. so that the arrow may fly
upwards and slip in between the laminae . . .'

437
The-observation is interesting, but it contains some false reasoning inasmuch as
low nocking . confers no advantage of any kind. It leads to unsteady and even,
possibly, uncontrolled flight, Today's English teaching is that the
nocking-point should be $ in. above the point that is directly opposite the
arrow-pass and it must never be below (e.g. F. Bilson, Bowmanship, London, 1965,
P. 69).

All existing silk —a from the Middle East that have been so far examined are
bound with thread at the centre to prevent chafe on the string from the thumb
and the nock of the _ arrow. In an old string the nocking-point is also a common
breaking-point, hence the need for added protection there. In some cases extra
binding is found immediately above the nocking- point, and the extra thickness
provides a means of accurately locating the nock. The arrow can then be nocked
just below the binding and slipped up the string until it is stopped by this
thickened portion. This ensures that the arrow is nocked at the same place each
time, As none of the strings examined go back more than about two centuries and
since we have found no earlier

438
50 SARACEN ARCHERY


evidence of any kind to indicate that the nocking-point was in any way marked,
it may well be that this practice was a later innovation.

439To nock quickly without looking is a very difficult operation. Nevertheless, we
have no reason to doubt that proficiency could be achieved after many hours of
practice.
