# On the procedures, conduct, and principles to be observed by a novice

i “Mark and carefully retain the fundamentals as expounded in our work, for
practice will prove then to be sound. If you are wise, you will practise
patiently and persistently, for anything hard can become easy with
practice. Furthermore, before you uy for marksmanship and take up wagering,
aspire to mastery of the draw and accuracy in range and elevation.’!? This
advice is intended to encourage the novice (alib), firstly, to apply himself to
learning, secondly, to acquire a thorough grasp of the fundamentals of archery
and the technique of perfect shooting by dint of hard and regular practice, and
thirdly, to aspire to mastery of the draw until it is so impressed upon his
limbs that he will infringe none of the fundamental rules when shooting. All
this can only be attained by patience, perseverance, and much regular practice,
which must be acquired before he tries for marksmanship and wagering; for if the
novice is bent on shooting a marks- rd: arrow he will fail to notice that he is
unconsciously infringing the fundamental rules of

9595 art.

The first thing that a learner should do is to take a light bow of the kind
termed kabbad,?  grasp it, and draw with the three appropriate fingers for some
days until he can apply the correct grasp. He should next lock his fingers on
the bowstring without using an arrow and draw for a time until he is able to
lock correctly and can thus grasp, lock, and draw to the best of his physical
ability. When he has succeeded in this, he should, for some days, nock an arrow
and bring it to full draw without shooting. He should then lock on the string
without an arrow and loose an uncharged string, practising this for a time until
he can release correctly. In his next stage he should nock what is known as a
Jarrám, “or unfletched arrow,!* and draw and release it at a practice drum
(battiyyah; below, p. 156). He should do this for quite a time, and, once able
to shoot correctly, progress to a bow a little!5 more powerful than the one he
has been shooting and again shoot at the practice drum for some days. Every few
days he should take a more powerful bow until he has worked through five
successive bows, each stronger than the one before, and the fifth most powerful
of all. ;

960Once he has acquired control and developed a natural proficiency in shooting, he
should begin to bend powerful bows that are as strong as he can possibly handle
and continue shooting at the practice drum night and day with different
bows. When he can shoot correctly and his limbs are steady and firm, ‘he can
then go out into the field!" and shoot at the butt for some days without using
any mark, all the tíme watching where his arrows fall. Once he can do correctly
all that he has set out to do, he should next go out into the desert and shoot
into the great void, again without any mark, al! the time watching the flight of
his arrows through the air. When he can see that his arrows do not flirt, but
pass properly through the air in even flight, he should, after mastering all
this, shoot at a mark on his own and persevere until he attains a high
proportion of accurate shots,


152

961
FPFRULEVURES, LUINDULCGLI, AND PKINUIVLES 153


During all this training he should go and consult master archers and show them
how he shoots, asking them to point out his faults and how to eliminate them.®
He should regularly watch how first-class bowmen shoot without taking part
himself and endeavour to assimilate good. points either from what he himself can
see to be good performance or from their own conversation.  These he should put
into practice on his own, and when he has acquired mastery and considers his
shooting to be as perfect as that of other archers, and when this view is
confirmed by what full-fledged archers "who have seen his shooting’ have to say
about him, he may join them. In his conversation!" with such persons he should
be polite and gracious, adopting an attitude of self-abasement and humility, and
should shoot with them as they deem appropriate until he becomes conversant with
their customs and drill. During this time, furthermore, he should seek useful
advice from persons he considers qualified to give it. When he outclasses
someone else, he should not exalt himself above that person nor despise him nor
provoke him, but rather make modesty his rule and observe silence and good
manners, Finally, hard and regular practice is as a religious bounden duty to be
performed by every archer whether he be a teacher (mu allim) or learner
(mutaallim), 1?

962
i


It is established in authentic tradition?? that the Prophet said, ‘The angels
attend no human sport save archery.’ ‘Archers should therefore be aware of the
exalted station of the angels who attend them and should rank them as guests and
respect them, for the Prophet said, ‘If a man believe in God and the Last Day,
let him do honour to his guest.’ Going to the shooting range (marma), then,
should be regarded by the archer as going to the mosque, and he should consider
those with whom he consorts there as leaders of men and persons of the highest
standing, Likewise, he should think of his training in archery as training in
religious knowledge. He should therefore make a practice of first performing a
lesser ablution!* and set about his business, praising God with tongue and heart
as he makes for one of the gardens of Paradise with the peace of God upon him
and with dignity of bearing. When he reaches his destination (i.e. the range},
he should enter politely, greeting all those present with the words, ‘Peace be
upon you!’  He would do well also to perform two rak‘ahs in an act of
worship. It is not a matter of saluting the actual place, but rather a key to
safe-keeping, success, and accurate shooting; for if pro- ceedings are opened
with an act of worship, they will be worthy of a happy issue and will be blessed
with God’s good direction and success, The archer should next say a private
prayer and ask God—exalted be He—for good direction and right guidance, for it
is an established tradition that the Prophet said, ‘‘Ali,!® ask God for guidance
and good direction, and, in asking for guidance, remember to ask that you be
guided in the right path, and, in asking for good direction, remember to ask
that the arrow be well directed to the mark.’

963The next step is for the archer to take out his bow and arrows, examine them,
and see what choice shooting demands. Tightening his belt, he then prepares
himself for shooting, and, when his turn comes round, rises, tucks up his sleeve
if it is too ample,!’ and gathers his skirt into his belt if it is hanging down!
and utters the invocation, ‘In the name of God? He then takes his arrows in his
right hand and his bow in his left and stations himself in his proper place in a
polite, calm, and dignified manner, at the same time lowering his eyes in modest
silence, moving gracefully and easily, and praying God to grant him power,
might, and accuracy. He next places his arrows in his waist-belt, takes out the
first arrow, examines it, spins it on the nail of the middle finger in between
the ends of the left index finger and thumb (above, p. 30), nocks it gracefully
without looking at the operation, and then shoots in the manner already de-
scribed, When the arrow leaves the centre of the bow; he should follow it with
his eyes to the point of descent and, if it hits the mark, praise God and show
Him gratitude. If he misses, he should reflect on the reason for his failure and
earnestly try to eradicate the fault which caused him to miss.

7

964
sii


Every time the archer shoots he should invoke God—exalted be He--with the words,
‘In the name of God’ and, whenever he makes a hit, he should praise Him to whom
belongs all power and glory. He should regard accurate shooting as proceeding
from the bounty of God—exalted be He—and the divine guidance and assistance. If
he misses, he should not become exasperated or despair of God’s refreshing
justice, nor should he revile himself or his bow or his arrows. To do

965
with cries of ‘Well done!’ ‘And by God,’ said he, ‘they had no sooner applauded
than I blushed for shame at such-and-such a mistake I had once made in the same
matter!’

Do beware of impairing your own ability by seeing another hit the mark when you
yourself have failed to make the same grade, for there is no question bere of
any deficiency. No, deficiency, all deficiency in fact, is a matter of bei
incapable of aspiring to reach the highest level and attain your objective. Do
not tell yourself, therefore, that you cannot attain what others have achieved,
for anyone who says this betrays the fact that he is a failure who cannot
succeed and has lost all ambition. It is upon aspirations that men depend for
achievement. In the two collec- tions of authentic traditions of the Prophet! it
is reported that he said, ‘The believer who is strong is better in the sight of
God and dearer to Him than the believer who is weak.’ In every righteous
enterprise, therefore, strive after that which will avail you, ask God for
succour, and do not flag. On this very Point one poet says:

966
‘If the qualities of a man arouse your admiration, then be him, And you yourself
will soon display those same qualities that you admire in him.  To generous and
noble deeds there is none to bar your way, if only you approach them."


Another poet says:

967
‘It (sc. defeat) surely must not cause you to despair Of preparing for another
fight, for glory comes by Stages and degrees; The spear’s cane shaft whose
height you have beheld grows slowly, climbing joint by joint.’


iv

968
that the Prophet said, ‘Do not abuse your brother, for God will deliver him and
visit you yourself with affliction.’ The archer, and indeed any other Muslim and
believer, must concern himseif only with his own faults, Praise God, then, and
do not grudge your brother archer his successful shooting nor make his
achievement seem paltry in his eyes. You should not say, ‘A good shot for one
who is no archer!’ nor again, “A lucky shot!” This kind of behaviour is that of
low and ignorant people who know nothing of life and have no practical
experience of men and affairs.


+

969
PROCEDURES, CONDUCT, AND PRINCIPLES 155


know how to heat a bow (above, p. 99) and how to adjust and repair it, how to
straighten his arrows and correct the curve of his bow, and how to knot his bows
trings. He should also know how to eradicate a fault if one occurs fand know the
reason for the fault. When??? he has a knowledge, mastery, and understanding of
such matters as well as skill and proficiency in shooting, and then, acquiring
familiarity with the rules of wagering and legitimate shooting, is able to
distinguish between what is permissible and what is not, is familiar with
competition shooting and the rules and regulations for other archery
contests-—when, I say, he has a knowledge, mastery, and understanding of such
matters, a man is then a full-fledged archer and can take his place as such
among his fellows and share their fortunes and misfortunes. But even so, he will
still not have a complete grasp of all there is to know about shooting, and he
will never be too old to learn.  Authorities on archery say that, no matter how
much knowledge of the art of shooting a man may acquire and no matter how long
he lives, he will not achieve complete mastery,

970
COMMENT 1. The Training of an Archer


An important part of Mustafa Kani’s manual is devoted to a description of the
guild of Turkish archers, the conduct of its business, the acceptance of
novices, rules of practice, and ethics (Hein, /s?., XV, pp. 241
ff. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 106 ff.). It is regrettable that nothing wholly comparable
is contained in our treatise, for the rules of practice and ethical standards
expounded in the above chapter and the one that is to follow are discernibly
associated with some system of professional organization similar in kind to that
described by G. Baer in his analysis of guild structure in seventeenth-century
Egypt (Egyptian Guilds, pp. 49 fÈ). There we encounter a hierarchy of masters,
master-apprentices, and ordinary apprentices, all subject to the authority of a
leading member, or shaykh, and enjoying the spiritual patronage of some
venerated per- sonage often belonging to the generation of the Prophet.

971Within this hierarchical system the first step of the apprentice (talib,
muta'allim, mubtadi) was to attach himself to his occupational group by
establishing a personal relationship with a master (usta, or ustádh, mu'allim,
munta(h)i) whose business it would be to instruct him in the secrets of the
craft and the traditions, rituals, and religious ceremonies peculiar to his
group.  After an initial period of probation the novice entered into a covenant
Cahd) with his master who bound him by oath to the observance of certain duties
(cf. that described below, p. 157). His ordinary apprenticeship served, he
qualified in due course for guild membership as master- apprentice, or
journeyman, The next and, for most ordinary members the final, step was the
attainment of a licence (jdzah) to practise as a master. On each of the four
occasions mentioned formal proceedings with prayers and a greater or lesser
degree of ritual were held in the presence of officers or members of the guild
(ikheodn, ‘brethren’.

To judge from all that is inferable from the sources available to us, the career
of a Mameluke archer, mutatis mutandis, followed a similar kind of course within
the same kind of institutional framework, though there are indications that it
was not as rigid or elaborate as some may care to think.

972
2. Rules of Practice


Most contemporary Western instructors would approve the principles of training
advocated in the text. At the heart of the matter is the concept that the
beginner should learn to use a bow without actually discharging an arrow so
that, undistracted by the behaviour of the missile, he may concentrate on
handling the weapon in the approved manner. Only after the attainment of
reasonable proficiency in this respect should he be allowed to shoot arrows,

973When the shooting stage is reached, there is much merit in discouraging the use
of a target until


150 AFLINN ULAN OWA

974
the pupil has learned to group his arrows to the best of his ability. Good
grouping will indicate that he has achieved a consistent technique—the essence
of good shooting—and is ready to attempt the relatively simple step of placing a
group around the centre of a target.

The baztiyyah, or practice drum, according to Reinaud, was a kind of barrel
covered at one end with a cow hide so as to give a target face and mounted at
breast-height on a four-legged stand (FA, 1848, pp. 218-19). A stuffed bag or
sack (torba) similarly mounted and angled at about 44° is mentioned by Mustafa
Kani as a taining device for flight shooting (Hein, Isl., XV, PP. 255-56,
figs. 37 and 38. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 112-13 and fig 42). The diameter of the drum
is not given, but we conjecture that it was on the small side with a diameter of
2 feet or so.

975
3. Ethics and Courtesy


-Quite apart from drill, discipline, and orderliness, the commendable theme of
politeness and good manners seems to have attached itself to archery from the
earliest times. The motto of the Grand National Archery Society, viz. “Union,
True Heart, and Courtesie’, echoes the spirit of a Chinese poem dating from the
second or third century B.C.:

976
Clout and pin-hole are marked, already is hung The shooting-target, where with
bow in hand, And arrows under arm Each archer does obeisance to each, Willing to
yield his rights of precedence.  (‘The Great Summons’, Waley, Chinese Poems,
p. 42.)


The standards of conduct laid down in our text are ageless and, religious
aspects apatt, are as closely followed today as they must have been a thousand
years ago.

977
4. The Ghunyah and a Passage in Al-Jabarti’s ' Aja'ib


Between the code of ethics and behaviour communicated by our author and that
laid down in an jázah, or licence, granted to a Cairene bowyer of the eighteenth
century there is a striking similarity which will not elude those intimately
acquainted with al-Jabarti’s chronicle, ‘Aja’ib al-athdr, in which the second is
recorded (Cairo edo., A.H. 1322, II, pp. 227-30. Cf. Baer, op. cit.,
PP. 52-53). In tone and phraseology the text of the Egyptian raza is, as a
whole, so reminiscent of Taybughi's treatise that there can be little doubt that
the latter is the source of its inspiration.  By comparison with examples of
ijázahs known to us from our manuscript sources, that quoted by al-Jabarti is an
elaborate affair and cannot be regarded as typical of the period which directly
concerns us. It does, however, testify to the currency and authority of
Taybugha’s work.
