# On adjustments required by different physiques

Men vary in body and structure. They are of tall stature with long arms, long
neck and big chest, or of short stature with short arms and short neck. Or, they
may combine different characteristics of the two extremes, Thus a tall man might
have long arms and a small chest, or short arms and a big chest, and so on,
according to somatic differences which it would take too long to go into.
Sizes, at any rate, tio vary, and, since this is so, there are different methods
of shooting ;* for each of our predecessors in archery* took up whatever lay
within his own physical capacity and made no attempt to perfect that of which he
was incapable. Each of them, therefore, commended whatever was within his
capacity and limits of attainment and regarded it as right, at the same time
condemning ali else,

780Most masters (ustddin) hold that the tall man with all the perfect
characteristics of such should grasp squarely because of the length of his
fingers and the size of his grasp. It is the fimest grasp.  They say that
everyone with a long arm-span, long neck, and slight beard should squat
obliquely (yag'ud munharif") so as to set the target in line with his lett
shoulder and that he should grasp squarely. What the archer does in this case is
to place the main (here ‘mid-line of the grip’s dorsal surface’; above, p. 45)
of his bow’s grip in the middle crease of his little finger, ring-finger, and
middle finger, and in the distal crease of his left index finget.? He then tucks
the rbranjak (here, evidently, ‘belly of the grip’; but see Glossary) in to a
point the width of two fingers away from his wrist-bone, at the same time
tensing the bottom three fingers and relaxing the other two. The index finger is
then wrapped over the back of the grip (matn), and the thumb placed on top of it
` pressing squarely against the grip. Once in this position, the tip of the
thumb should be neither above nor below the level of its own base. He next locks
‘69’ and tenses the bottom three fingers of this hand, keeping the index finger
outside (i.e. to the right of) the bowstring and placing the nock so. that it is
two-thirds of the way along the proximal phalanx of the index finger. Sighting
outside the bow with both eyes together, he draws on the point where the tuft of
hair grows between the lip and chin, and then right back to the lobe of the
ear. "This draw is the misdh (sec Comment). They say this is the method of Abū
Hashim.

It is taught that a person with short arms and fingers, short neck, big beard,
big chest, and fat hands should squat facing the mark squarely and grasp
obliquely. What the archer does in the case of the oblique grasp is to place the
matn of his grip in the proximal crease "formed by the bottom three fingers! and
the distal crease of the left index finger. He then tucks the ibranjak in to a
point the width of one finger away from the wrist-bone. The rest of the
procedure is as described in the case of the tall man, except that the tip of
the right index finger is kept inside (i.c. to the left of) the string, the nock
of the arrow resting at the bottom end of the proximal phalanx of the index
finger. The archer then aims with both eyes inside the bow and draws on the
cheek. This is the bayád (see Comment) because it is the opposite of that of the
tall person.°

781Now, a tall man with long fingers grasps squarely owing to the length of his
fingers and the width of his hand, in order to prevent his finger tips from
touching the heel of the hand. On


122

782
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 123


account of his long neck he squats obliquely, and because of the length of his
right index finger he keeps it outside the bowstring. The short man, on the
other hand, squats directly facing the mark because of his deep chest and short
neck and grasps obliquely on account of his short fingers.  He squats ix the
frontal position to avoid striking his beard with the bowstring, and he draws on
his cheek because of the shortness of his neck. He looses without any downward
and forward thrust as he follows through (Ch. 14) because his posture as he
squats directly facing the mark is not consistent with such a movement. Once his
arrow is drawn, his draw is bayad because of the shortness of his arm-span. For
Jamshid says in his book? that, as regards the grip, there are three positions
(manazi) "for the arrowhead!: the lesser, the greater, and the injurious
(bidayaA, niháyah, mka@yah, respectively; lit. ‘initial, final and injurious
points’). His maxim is, ‘Give the tall man the lesser, which is the draw at its
shortest {awal wafa’), or “wiping the fist” (misa?  i-gabdah). Give the short
man the greater, which is the bayad, or ultimate (tammy (below). He allows the
latter to let his elbow sink down.’ This is the method of Tahir al-Balkhi.

783
«pape ee ot Bere



784

do MS OU E ED DPI

785
Square



786

Oblique

787
Birds eye view


FIG. 42. STANCE; OBLIQUE AND SQUARE (a). Used by tall man. (b), Used by short
man.

788
The archer of medium build adopts an intermediate squatting position between the
oblique and frontal so that he has the target in line with his collar-bone.* He
also adopts a grasp that lies between the oblique and the square. What he does
is to place the matn of the grip in the middie of the proximal phalanges?
half-way between the middle and proximal creases. The sbranjak of his grip he
places at a distance from the wrist-bone that would amount to the width of one
and a half fingers. When nocking, he locks ‘69’ on nock and string and allows
the bowstring to bisect the end of the right index finger. He sights with the
right eye inside the bow and the left outside, and then draws on his mouth right
to the lobe of his ear, the draw in this case being termed misáh bayag. He
follows through with a forward and downward thrust of the bow-hand and twists
with the other, but in both cases executes only half the full movement. This,
then, is the intermediate method, which is that of Ishaq ar-Raffa’.*°

Masters of olden times are quoted as saying that a master (ustad) cannot be such
until he can lengthen the short and shorten the long. Shortening the long
(taqsir at-ta3/) means that the archer grasps squarely and, by so doing,
shortens his fingers in such a way that their tips do not reach the hee! of the
hand.!! Lengthening the short (rajwřf al-qasir)!? means that he grasps obliquely
and so lengthens his fingers to go round the grip in the appropriate
manner. They likewise taught that the farthest point to which an archer should
reach when drawing should be the point at which the distal phalanx of his right
index finger comes to rest beneath the lobe of his right ear. When he looses
and, bringing his right hand into operation, opens the right index finger, its
nail should come to rest beneath the lobe of his ear. This goes for tall, short,
and medium persons alike,

789À person with a short neck should squat in the frontal position. The same
applies to a person with a protrusive chest and, again, to a person with a big
beard. Every person with any single one of these characteristics should face the
mark directly whether squatting, standing, or riding. A person with a long neck,
high, unprotrusive!? chest and small beard should squat obliquely.  The oblique
position also applies to standing and riding. If a man's fingers are short and
his palm


124 SARACEN ARCHERY

790
is long, he should square his palm and slant his fingers. If, on the other hand,
his fingers are long and his palm is short, the palm should be slanted and his
fingers squared.

There are also three positions (mandzil) on which to draw. The tall man should
draw on the tuft of hair between his lower lip and chin, the short man on his
cheek, and the man of medium build on his mouth. It has been explained that the
limit to which the draw should be taken is marked by the lower extremity of the
ear, which means to say that when one looses, the nail of the right index finger
should lie beneath the lobe of the ear. This is the soundest pronouncement on
the subject and a much-needed piece of advice which men will do well to heed,
particularly those who are serious practitioners of the art and are called
*master" 14

791Now, it is my humble opinion that since archery came into existence its
essential purpose has been to inflict injury upon one's enemy, and the greater
the power and strength of the bow and the longer the arrow, the preater the
injury inflicted. It is our opinion then that if the archer takes up an oblique
position (inbarafa) with the mark in line with his left shoulder, he will
develop more powerful traction since the joints of the left arm can be locked
more or fess in a straight line in the same horizontal plane with each bone
supporting the other. The forearm will then be firm enough to take the weight of
the bow, and it will accordingly attain its maximum power, Furthermore, if the
draw is ‘correctly !5 executed from this position, a longer arrow can be
used. To recapitulate: for the reasons we have explained the archer who uses
this technique will not only shoot more powerfully than an opponent who does
not, provided, of course, that both persons are equally strong, but he will also
draw a longer arrow which will be more effective against an enemy adopting a
different method.


The archer who, on the other hand, faces the mark directly—by which is meant one
who puts his face squarely to the mark—will experience impairment of traction
because when he comes to draw, he will bend his left arm in front of his
face. His arm, therefore, will turn and come in upon itself and, in so doing,
weaken, thereby impairing his traction and leaving him no alternative but to
draw a short arrow. The result of all this will be a reduction of his
effectiveness. An archer should, then, shoot according to the first technique if
he can do so. The reason for this lies not only in the factors we have already
mentioned as affecting the strength end power of the bow and the length of the
arrow, but also in the fact that a combatant enters the fray with his left side

792



793Fic. 43. DRAWING: OBLIQUE AND SQUARE (a). Tall man draws to point of jaw. Lock
‘69’: square.  (b). Short man draws to lobe of ear. Lock ‘69°: oblique.


ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 125

794
‘because it enables him to shoot the enemy from under his shield without
exposing himself to the foc.!5 This way of shooting, however, can be difficult,
and, in fact, cannot be practised!?  by persons with certain physical
characteristics. This is especially true in the case of a man with a protrusive
chest, short neck or big beard, ffor such a person must, as we have said, face
the mark directly’. I myself have heard some archers condemn the technique and
thoroughly disapprove of it on aesthetic grounds, saying that it is the Persian
manner of shooting.!* But to condemn it is very much a mistake on their part
because the main object is not an elegant appearance but the effectiveness of
the weapon in repelling the enemy.

The intermediate method gives much the same degree of effectiveness as the
oblique and is universally acceptable.!? The rule for its adherents will, then,
be the intermediate, which conforms to the Apostle Muhammad's dictum: ‘In all
things the best policy is the happy medium.’

795Itis my opinion that any man whose limbs are in due proportion, whose neck is
long and supple, and whose chest is not protrusive, can exercise greater freedom
of movement and action in shooting than anyone else, The closer he is to
obliqueness, the stronger the bow he can draw and the longer the arrow. Any man
with disproportionate members, no matter who he is, will fall short of
perfection according to the measnre of his disproportions. Exactly the same
thing applies in the case of enterprise and intellectual capacity, both of which
must be commensurate with physical potential. For a man of limited enterprise
cannot equal a highly enterprising and intelligent individual. On the contrary,
in nothing will he come anywhere near him, even though his members may perhaps
be what they should.

Weapons of war must be exactly suited to the members of those who use
them. Since this is $0, the principle is all the more right and proper when
applicable to the bow because of its proven superiority over all other weapons;
for it is even as the Prophet said when bows were mentioned in his exalted
presence, ‘No weapon has ever done better (sc. for the cause of Islam) than the
bow.’ Any man of intelligence and experience, then, should have a bow to suit
his limbs, as advised in our poem,*° and the same applies to the arrow. If, for
some reason, he cannot attain perfection he should endeavour to get as near to
it as possible. Since a man cannot change the way in which human limbs are
created, he should turn his attention to adapting his weapons to the
requirements of the limbs which he has, because anything that is man-made can
easily be altered. To have an archer adjust his weapons to suit his limbs is a
more sensible and easier policy than to tax him beyond the capacity of his
members, If a man has a large palm and long fingers, we tell him to grasp
squarely to enable him to grip properly. If his fingers are too long,?!  we tell
him to thicken the grip of his bow either by a fundamental structural alteration
or by affixing a piece of leather as indicated earlier (p. 9). This is a more
sensible course than to assume the difficult task of changing his narural grasp
because of the slenderness of a bow's grip, which can be altered and adjusted,
or even be entirely rebuilt. This is the easier and more profitable policy. A
man with a small hand can be advised to adopt the reverse procedure. We tell him
to grasp obliquely,?? and if his fingers are short, we tell him to narrow the
grip of his bow.  To enable a man with a long and supple neck to sight
correctly, we tell him to sight outside the bow and gauge in that position. We
need press the point no further since we have already said enough to enable a
man of sound understanding and good common sense to grasp our meaning.

796
COMMENT 1. Basic Considerations


This useful chapter summarizes the teaching expounded earlier in the work and
introduces the reader to certain important aspects of advanced technique. The
novice, once having mastered the basic methods in which he has been trained, is
ready to proceed to the development of an individual style of shooting. The
pattern of progression is as valid today as it was in the time of

797
126 SARACEN ARCHERY


Taybughà. When he first learns to shoot, the beginner experiences a sense of
awkwardness and is more often than not confused by his attempts to memorize ail
the various details essential to sound performance. With practice most points
become a matter of automatic behaviour, and when some degree of proficiency has
been attained, he 1s almost sure to feel the need for certain minor
variations. He should be encouraged to satisfy this need under the watchful eye
of a competent master who will prevent him from developing some radical error
which at a later stage it might be difficult to correct. A good master
thoroughly familiar with all possible variations should quickly perceive his
pupils’ problems and advise them to take up certain styles calculated to bring
them to a mastery of their art.

798The need for variations arises almost entirely from the physical characteristics
of the individual archer, and, as Taybughi so rightly observes, no two men are
exactly alike. Basically, it is not.  unreasonable to consider, as Taybughà
does, the two extremes, between which limits wide variations can be found,


2. The Draw

799
In shooting a bow the archer has what amounts to a foresight formed by the
combination of the arrow's point and the side of the bow. The manner in which he
uses this sight depends on whether he aims ‘inside’ the bow or ‘outside’, but in
either case there is a definite object to be aligned with the target. A trained
archer may not be conscious of what he is doing, and it may even be said that
alignment of his sight should be a reflex operation. Since there is no
backsight, it is essential, for the attainment of constant direction, that the
tail of each and every arrow always be drawn to the same point. If the point is
allowed to vary, the line of the arrow in relation to the line of sight will
also vary, and shooting wili of necessity be erratic.

The modern archer positively ‘anchors'\—to use the accepted technical term—his
drawing hand either under his chin or against the side of his mouth according to
his adopted technique.  There are many variations, but what is essential and
common to all is that the archer should feel his drawing hand firmly pressed
into place in the chosen position. This method of anchoring is relatively modern
and has been successfully developed over the last century or so. By contrast,
there is the traditional Japanese technique whereby the drawing hand is brought
back beyond the head and roughly above the point of the right shoulder. In this
case there is no positive lodgment of the hand. A constant position can
nevertheless be achieved by the shaft’s lightly touching against the cheek, and
with practice an unvarying length of draw is attainable. The Mameluke technique
with which we are here concerned seems to be more akin to the Japanese than to
that of the modern Western archer. In other words, there appears to be no anchor
as understood by the latter. However, that may be, ‘anchor’ is a conventent term
to apply to the position of the draw- hand at the moment of loosing, and for
this reason we shall use it in the present context in

800t sense.


3. Anchoring

801
‘Drawyng to the eare he [Homer] prayseth greatly, whereby men shoote both
stronger and longer: drawynge therefore to the eare is better than to drawe at
the breste... Holdynge must not be longe, for it bothe putteth a bowe in
ieopardy, & also marrcth a mans shoote . . k (Ascham, p. 105).


Drawing to the lobe of the ear is commended by the author of Arab Archery as a
time-honoured practice compatible with accurate and effective shooting, and
drawing to the white spot between the lobe of the car and the beard is declared
to be almost as good (p. 51). Neither of these choices, however, he regards as
the best. On the contrary, he advocates drawing to the end of the right jaw-bone
and running the arrow along the lips or moustaches.,

802
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 127


Whatever the options open to the individual, there is one rule from which the
archer should not depart if he is to draw a strong bow: he must not anchor at a
point below the level of his shoulders. For military archery the ear has always
been a favoured position. To draw to the ear does not necessarily imply that the
hand should be in contact with it, but rather that it should be brought back as
far as the limit set by the ear. Contact was not always made by the drawing
hand, and, in fact, the anchor-point often lay below the lobe as it was
obviously to do in the case of Taybugha’s tall man, whose shaft would be drawn
at a level half-way between lip and chin until the drawing hand came as far back
as the lobe of his ear. It is not stated that at this stage the shaft should
lightly touch the face, or that some part of the drawing hand should be in
contact with the jaw or neck. Nevertheless, something of the kind would seem to
be a highly desirable, if not necessary, safeguard against any lateral variation
in the position of the arrow’s nock. It should also be noted that the tall man
would need to have his head turned slightly to the right of his line of sight in
order to shoot in comfort (Fig. 42).

803At the other extreme, the short man is advised to draw with the shaft at a level
which would be roughly that of the tip of his nose. Since he is to stand or
squat squarely, he can face the target directly, but this attitude will prevent
him from setting his shoulders in line with the mark. It naturally follows that
he must angle his left arm at the shoulder as he trains his bow on the target.
Angling of the arm in this way will not only prevent him from exploiting his
strength to the Tull as the tall man can do, but it will also affect his methed
of gripping the handle over and above the degree to which it is already affected
by adjustments necessitated by the physical dimensions of his hand
(Fig. 42b). For the rest, the anchor-point of his drawing hand will be on, or
near, the lobe of his ear.


4. Terminology

804
The enigmatic yocabulary used to denote the various positions of the draw
presents a problem to which the best solution seems to be that which we are
about to propose. Based on a careful study of all relevant details known to us
at the time of writing, it takes account not only of information contained in
our Chapters II and 23, but also of data located as follows in CD: (i) C1, 44b;
C3, 73a; C^, 36b; D', 32a; D?, 59b; fii) C!, 73a-b; C?, 116a-117a; C3, 61a-b;
(iii) C! 68a-69b; C}, 1092-1115; C?, 572-582; D, 49a-51a; D*, 732-742.

The need for brevity precludes here the scrutiny of minutiae. Certain
observations must, however, be made. Firstly, in certain fundamental respects
the evidence of (1), into which textual corruption almost certainly enters,
directly contradicts that of (ii), which more closely agrees with what our
accepted text of the present chapter has to offer. Secondly, in one important
respect, viz. the expression applicable to the draw prescribed for an archer of
medium proportions, the evidence of (ii) is in conflict with that of (iii), and,
in fact, the same discrepancy—bayad in the one case as against sawäd in the
other—will, upon comparison of the present chapter with the next, be found to
exist in our own text. Thirdly and lastly, from the literature of which we have
first-hand knowledge we can only conclude that certain archers or authors, or
both, either used identical terms in different senses, or else misunderstood or
misapplied their terminology, or give the appearance of having done so, because
of changes in usage or extensions of meaning.

805Whatever the uncertainties of interpretation in respect of particulars, it is
our opinion that from a general standpoint there are two classes of terminology
to be distinguished: (2) that pertaining to the position of the arrowhead in
relation to the grip of the bow, viz, bidaya, kifáyah (above, p. 57), niháyah,
nikāyah; (b) that bearing on the movement and position of the drawing hand in
relation to the face, viz. (al-)bayád, (as-)sawdd, kashf (al-)bayád, n(V ?)sah
al-qabdah|(al-) bayad}(as-} sawad. :

A major hurdle in the way of our immediate disentanglement of this
terminological skein proved to be the ambiguity of gabdah, which prima facie
could be taken in the context as (a) ‘grip,

806
128 SARACEN ARCHERY


handle’ of the bow; (b) ‘bow-hand’; (c) ‘drawing hand’, After the elimination,
on technical grounds, of alí but the last of these meanings, the next step was
to determine the nature of the evident, but perplexing, contrast between bayad
(lit. ‘white, whiteness’) and sazad (lit. ‘black, blackness’) which—again on
technical grounds—we felt obliged to dissociate from the grip of the bow or the
bow-hand in favour of the drawing hand or face. Since there is an obvious
contrast between the ‘clean’ and bearded parts of the face, we finally decided
that it was to these that our terms referred. The last major problem lay in
mVsah. The meaning of the root msk ‘wipe, rub’ being clear enough, it was a
question of settling for one of three different MS readings, viz, misáh, masáh,
or massáh, the last being least common. On a number of grounds we decided in
favour of the first, which, by analogy with kashf in the expression k, al-bayàd
(ii, below), we take to be a verbal noun. In this verbal noun there inheres the
idea of ‘endeavouring to wipe one thing against another', and how it fits into
the picture will be seen in the explanations we now offer:

807



808FIG. 44. GRASPS: SQUARE AND OBLIQUE (a). Square. Arrowhead is bidáyah.
(b). Oblique. Arrowhead is nihdyah,


(i) The tail man draws his shaft on the tuft of hair between lip and chin, then
passes his hand over his beard to reach the anchor-point below the ear at the
angle of the jaw. His action in so doing is an attempt, against the pull of the
bow, to wipe his drawing hand (misa I-gabdahk) on his beard, or alternatively,
to wipe his beard (misah* s-sawad) with his drawing hand. Misdh used absolutely
would appear to be an abbreviated form of one or other of the two. At the other
end of things the arrowhead is in the first position (bidáyaA), safely
projecting perhaps as much as two inches beyond the bow because of his use of
the square grasp (Fig. 44a).

809(ii) The short man draws on his cheek (baydd), then reaches back to his
anchor-point marked by the lobe of his ear. His action in so doing is that of
revealing his cheek, or the ‘white’ (kaskf?  i-bayad). His arrowhead is in the
ultimate position (mhdyah), or as far back as it can safely be drawn, since his
use of the oblique grasp enables him to bring it on to the side of the bow's


grip (Fig. 44b).

810
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 129


case usually being described as bidáyah. For this there could be several
explanations, every one of which would be sheer hypothesis and make tedious
reading. It is sufficient to say that misah® (I-) bayad, whether it be as
suggested above or taken as a kind of compound expression incorporat- ing misāh
from (i) and bayád from (ii) above, makes perfectly good sense to us. As regards
the arrowhead, it is in the position that may be described as ‘just right"
(Exfayak).

811Finally, if any archer, whatever his proportions, exceeds the specified draw by
reaching back beyond the lobe of his ear, his arrowhead may come inside the grip
and be in a position to do him


harm (nikáyah).  5. Table: Somatic Differences and Technique

812
TALL MEDIUM SHORT School: Abii Hashim Ishaq Tahir Posture: Oblique Intermediate
“Square Grasp: Square Intermediate Oblique Lock: Index finger outside String
divides index Tip of index finger string finger inside string Aim: Outside bow
R. eye inside, I. eye Inside bow outside bow Drawing- point: Between lip and
chin On mouth On cheek Term: Misah, m. al-qabdah Misah (I-)bayád Bayad, kashf*
(I-)bayág (m. as-savád) (Some: m. as-sawad) Position of artowhead: First
Intermediate Ultimate


i.e. bidáyah ("lesser") ie. &fáyah (‘standard’) ie. nthayah (‘greater’)
Anchor-point: Angie of jaw Below lobe of ear At lobe of ear
