# On shooting with an arrow guide

There are many kinds of arrow-guide. Although originally designed for older men
who were past drawing strong bows and shooting long arrows, guides (majdr!) have
truly considerable advantages. In the first place they enable anyone using darts
(nabl) to carry with him a greater number of missiles—twice as many indeed—than
he would be capable of carrying if he were using ordinary long arrows. Another
advantage they have is that an enemy, if attacked with darts, will not see them
and dodge in the same way as he might if long arrows are used.* Yet another
advantage is that darts strike home more quickly than long arrows, for they have
a longer range (see Comment). Finally, the enemy cannot make use of darts or
shoot them back as he may well do to great effect if long arrows are used,

Among the different types of guide there arc the ‘dart’ (nab/), the ‘pen’
(galam), the ‘com- mander’s’ (asbsalàri), the ‘locust’ (jardd), and the ‘Bayram
Shah’. The safest and most con- venient from the archer's point of view is that
called the ‘king-guide’ (shah majrá). This is the one that "is slotted down the
middle and’? covers both darts and bowstring, for which reason it is called the
‘sultan of arrow-guides’.* It is used in the following manner. You first pass
the bowstring right through the guide and brace the bow, which now supports the
guide. After putting the guide to the nocking-point in the same way as you would
nock long atrows set in the centre of the bow (kabid al-qaws), you slip your
dart through the slot (shagg) right into the guide

928



929ja Yj cross section


Fic. 49. Tue Skah Majra (or Mijrat)

930
The slot at the top must be wide enough to admit the dart. The outer form could
be rounded.


145

931
146 SARAULIN AKRUOLENIL


(Fig. 49). The tassel at the end of the guide goes between the ning-finger and
middle finger, You now lock on the guide as you would if using long arrows. You
also draw and loose in the same way, except that the left arm is held firm like
a stock, Nor do you follow through with 4 forward and downward thrust of the
bow-hand as you would if shooting long arrows; you execute only half the
movement.* This is a point to watch. You should also guard against bringing the
guide to fuil draw and cocking the thumb in front of your darts. Past masters in
the art of shooting with guides can, and do, follow through with a forward and
downward thrust of the bow-hand, and they also rest the guide on the left
forearm, This is an excellent and more effective way of shooting, but the
trouble is that it can do harm to a person who does not know how to apply it
properly; for, should the guide slip, it may injure the fingers of his bow-hand
(gubbad) and put him out of action,

932Next there is the "long-nosed arrow-guide’ (myrat al-khurtiim), This is made of
a single length of wood hollowed out (niunakhar) on one side into a groove big
enough to accommodate darts, At one end of it there is a projection (&hurtüm,
‘proboscis’) of horn designed to hold the darts in place (Fig. 50). To shoot
with it, you first insert the bowstring between the horn and the wood of the
guide, take the dart, and fit its nock to the string. To nock the dart in the
guide, you close the little finger, ring-finger, and part of the middle finger,
and then grip the dart "between the thumb" and middle finger and the end of the
right index finger which is left open. The head of the dart should be near the
end of the right index finger with the long horn nose pressing on the guide. You
then nock and shoot in the manner already described.



933

Fic. 50. ‘LONG-NOSED’ GUIDE

934
Archers also use an arrow-guide called the ‘stirrup’ (ijrat ar-rikab) which has
a hand-grip of iron? and a nut like that of a jarkk (above, p. xxxii). It is
also known as the 'Maghrebi' because it was invented in the Maghreb
(i.e. N.W. Africa). Aithough an excellent device, it is difficult to master, is
liable to go wrong, and is heavy (Fig. 51). It is nevertheless possible for an
archer to develop the strength of his grasp without undue strain on his
muscles,’ so that he can use a guide of this kind with any bow hc can pull, even
though it were 100 razis (above, p. 88.) "For such a person! it has proved one
of the best and most effective field weapons, ‘and if once he can handle itl,
the archer will find it not only easier to use but also immeasurably more
effective than all other kinds of guide.* It is difficult to make, but I have
developed a modified form and made it the ‘king-guide’ (shah mxjrat), of which
name it is more worthy than the original guide of that name because it allows
more rapid shooting than its predecessor, gives greater striking power, permits
the use of a more powerful bow, and is an easier and less troublesome weapon for
the user. If an archer knows how to handle it properly, he will, by the mere
fact of using the weapon,


ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE 147

935
outstrip any archer shooting long arrows both in number of shots and in respect
of distance, I have in fact shot six darts? with the aid of this device, as
against five long arrows shot by an archer in the usual manner. My aim in
designing it was to enable the user to shoot Jarkh bolts back at the enemy aud
do twice as much damage as the jar&h, even though the jarkh might be two gintdrs
Damascus weight (about 814 Ib.). Failure to achieve this purpose is indicative
of bad shooting, incompetence, and witlessness,

To use the guide, the archer first grasps the handle with the index finger,
middle finger and ring-finger, and, if the handle is big enough to take it, the
little finger as well. He next presses the trigger (miftak, ‘key’) with his
thumb, and with the head of the bolts opens the nut (yawezah) that is fitted in
the guide for catching the string so as to allow the latter to enter its holder
(bayt).  He then sets the guide in the nocking position so that he can see the
string correctly housed ( fi bayttht), locked, and held by the nut. Then, taking
his thumb off the trigger, he proceeds to draw, baving first nocked the bolt in
the manner previously described. Once at full draw, he presses the trigger
strongly with the thumb and looses, but in so doing does not follow through with
any forward and downward movement of the bow-hand. Before letting go of the
guide he sets it once more to the nocking-point of his bowstring, takes another
bolt, and nocks it, He may shoot in this way as much as he wishes, but the
resetting of the string in the nut should follow quickly

936



937Fic, 5x. A STIRRUP-GUIDE Details of mechanism are not known.


upon discharge, When he has finished shooting, the archer presses the trigger
with his thumb and returns the nut to the same position as before
shooting. Great care should be taken not to forget, otherwise the guide will be
put out of action and rendered unserviceable. Once this happens it will only
work again after being unscrewed and repaired—a difficult task for anyone not
familiar with the procedure,

938H you have mastered the art of following through with a forward and downward
movement of the bow hand, you may use the technique, but do be on your guard,
when shooting with guides, against raising the end of your thumb after
completing the draw. The same rule applies when shooting with long arrows,
Finally, don’t twist the guide when drawing. It should be as straight as a die
at the source of traction right from the moment you start to puli until the very
moment you loose.??


COMMENT

939
I. General


Basically, the arrow-guide is a simple piece of equipment designed to cnable the
archer to draw an arrow inside the bow and therefore shoot arrows or darts that
would otherwise be too short

940
148 SARACEN ARCHERY


for his draw. Faris and Elmer, who were the first in modern times to discuss the
nature of this interesting device, rightly consider it to be ‘one of the most
important discoveries in modern toxophilitic research’ (Arab Archery, p. 174).

941There is more than one explanation of its origin. The author of Arab
Archery—aftet at- Tabari—favours the view that it was invented by ‘the Moslems’
when driven, while fighting ‘the Turks’, to devise some method of suppressing
the enemy’s devastating practice of returni spent arrows (p. 124). Others
ascribe its invention to the Persians who, after adopting the technique of
shooting from the oblique and more effective position in order to overcome the
strength of Turkish shields, were obliged to use longer arrows and therefore
‘for the use of old men and youngsters . . . unable to effect the long and hard
draws resulting from the very long arrows, evolved shooting with the Ausbän and
dawdan arrows; thereby bringing up the driving force of their shots to a par
with the shots of the Strong men who could draw a long arrow to the



942

FIG. 52. THE ARROW-GUIDE (Majrá, or Mijrat) (a). The dart in position on the
string is shown without fetchings for clarity.  Crushing of the feathers would
be of little consequence as they would spring back when the dart was shot.

943



944(b}, The arrow-guide at full draw.


ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE 149

945
full limit’ (ibid., pp. 124-25). These and other views which need not be
considered here recur in technical literature.

Darts for use with arrow-guides varied in length according to type (above,
p. 29), and for some we can offer approximate lengths, These are (a) husbán:
about 15 in.; (b) dawdan (?, or dudani): about r0 in. ; (c) jarad: from 74
in. to 24 in. ; (d) 'usfüri: as in the preceding (though not according to Arab
Archery, p. 129, in which it does not exceed 3 in}. At first sight one is apt to
suppose that even the longest dart must have been much lighter than the normal
arrow by reason of its shorter shaft. Taybugha offers no details on this aspect
of the problem, but in Arab Archery we read: ‘The kind of wood suitable for
these arrows is heavy, hard, and strong. Likewise, the arrowheads should be
heavy as light ones are worthless... Such arrows should weigh ten dirhams each
[about 480 gr.]... The 'usfüri, on the other hand, should weigh three dirhams
[about 145 gr.], perhaps even less, and be of very thick wood" (pp. 129-30). If
we compare these weights with those of normal arrows shown on p. 30, the war
dart may only have weighed 100 gr. less than a long arrow used with the same
bow. The difference in weight, therefore, was probably not as great as one might
at first suppose. That it nevertheless existed, on the other hand, is inferable
from the statement that ‘darts strike home more quickly than long arrows, for
they have a longer range’ (p. 145). An increase in speed and range suggests (a)
a higher initial velocity consistent with the performance of the lighter missile
if shot from the same bow as one that is heavier, and (b) a slight reduction im
surface drag resulting from the shorter shaft of the dart.

946It is difficult to say precisely how much truth there is in the assertion that
darts would not be seen and avoided in the same way as ordinary
arrows. Admittedly, a smaller missile would be a little less conspicuous, and
its higher velocity would allow less time for evasion or deflexion with a
shield. The most important advantage, however, would undoubtedly lie in the
archer’s ability to carry twice as many darts as ordinary arrows. In long-range
combat he would obviously be out of action as soon as he had expended the
contents of his quiver, and it might take him a little time to replenish it from
the supply-train or gather spent arrows shot by the enemy. The more he could
conveniently carry with him, therefore, the better.

The archer using a simple guide could quickly change to normal arrows whenever
he wished.  In this connexion it is worth noting that in existing Chinese
quivers, for instance, there are often as many as four compartments to
accommodate different types of arrow. Although we ourselves have found no
mention of any similar practice among archers of the Middle East, we do not
discount the possibility of its existence.

947
2. Some Forms of Arrow-guide


We know of no surviving example of a Middle Eastern guide. The Koreans, however,
used the same device, and a good Korean specimen is included in the Ingo Simon
Collection, Manchester Museum, No. O.7728 (Pl. 17). Made from a length of bamboo
about } in. in diameter, it is 281 in. long. Viewed in cross-section, it is
slightly more than semicircular, and at the rear end there are, as can be seen
in the plate, two holes through which a cord or thong was threaded for retaining
in the archer's drawing hand. This article represents the guide in its most
simple form.  How it was arranged and held can be seen in Fig. 52. Locking in
the usual way on both guide and dart, the archer drew both items together. When
the string was loosed, the dart was driven down the guide which remained in the
drawn position, held by the cord in the fingers of the right hand.

948According to Arab Archery, there were four kinds of guide: square, round,
hexagonal, and octagonal (p. 126). How these compared, or whether they
corresponded, with the first five listed by Taybugha, it is impossible to
say. That known as the ‘pen’ may have been so called because of its appearance,
for we learn from Arab Archery that ‘the end of the guide which is


£50 CARALEN ARUNEK Y

949
toward the bowstring at the time of shooting should be slightly thinner than the
other end and should also be pointed like a pen’ (ibid.). The Shape of the rear
end of the Korean guide could be roughly described in the same terms, Some clue
to the nature of the jarád, or ‘locust’, may, we suspect, be contained in
Mardi’s description of the husban, or ‘hailstone’ (Cahen, BEO, XII,
Pp. 132-33). The latter was a tubular device accommodating a horn runner with
stud-like projec- tions riding in a slot on one side (Fig. 53). Its missiles
whose description agrees with that given elsewhere of ‘locusts’ (like
‘hailstones’, a descriptive term from which the guide in each case takes its
name) were the length of the little finger. A number of them could be loaded,
one after the other, through a hole near the rear end of the guide, which thus
amounted to a breech- loading dart projector, When loosed, the runner ejected
the darts, which, once discharged, we are told, scattered ‘like locusts’,
Although small, light missiles of this kind can have had little pene- trative
power, we can imagine their nuisance value as a means of harassing unprotected
horses or men.


3. The ‘King-guide’

950The original form of the ‘king-guide’ as described in our text is reasonably
clear (Fig. 49).  It was a tubular piece of equipment slotted on opposite
sides. The slot in what would be the upper surface when the guide was in use had
to be wide enough to admit a dart. That in the lower surface, on the other hand,
needed only to be of sufficient width to permit the bowstring free passage.

Two objections can be seen to this sort of contrivance. Firstly, the string must
surely have rubbed against the side of the slot through which it ran, with
consequent reduction of efficiency arising from friction, Secondly, the fact
that the String was threaded through the guide means that, to shoot long arrows,
the bow would need to be unstrung to permit removal of the guide.

951The modified ‘king-guide’ evidently combined the idea of the original with that
of the ‘stirrup’ variety (Fig. 51), It appears to have been a slotted tube of
the kind indicated above.  Built into the stock of the guide at the rear end was
a nut of the same form as that used in cross- bows, but no doubt smaller. A
trigger mechanism was incorporated, but we are forced to conclude that its
design was faulty because of the trouble that could result if the archer failed
to reset the nut after use. We offer no suggestions about the possible ways in
which the mechanism might have operated since they would of necessity be so
conjectural as to be of no real value.

The stirrup which was incorporated in the modified ‘king-guide’ would have
permitted a more

952



953

Horn traveller

954
section


Fig. 53. THE SLOTTED GUIDE

955
UN SHUULING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE ISI


powerful draw than any that could be achieved with the thumb, but the claim that
it could do twice as much damage as the farkh must be taken with a grain of
salt. That it was effective for shooting jarkk bolts if handled by persons not
guilty of ‘bad shooting, incompetence, and witlessness’ is probably nearer the
truth.

956
4. An Experimental Guide


In the course of many experiments conducted both by ourselves and others the
most effective guide of which we have had experience is one constructed by
E. G. Heath whose interest and assistance we gratefully acknowledge. Made from
well-seasoned beech, it is 31 in. long and rectangular in cross-section. The
internal width of the channel is $ in. and its depth a little less than }
in. Practical experience has proved the measurements adequate. The rear end
tapers ‘like a pen’, and a cord is fitted 14 in. from the tip. In accordance
with one of the methods advocated in Arab Archery (p. 126) the cord is tied to a
ring which fits on the ring finger during shooting.

957In using the guide we also followed advice contained in Arab Archery regarding
the fletching of the 15-in. darts, viz. ‘There should be two side feathers just
outside the groove of the guide at the pen-shaped end, and a “male-feather”
(dhakar) in the hollow’ (p. 130). Although, in locking, the male-feather is
crushed as a result of pressure against the shaft from the middle phalanx of the
index finger of the drawing hand, there are no adverse effects since the vane
springs back undamaged as soon as the dart is discharged.
