# On arrows

The best arrows! should possess the following characteristics. They should be
roundly hewn, be of hard, solid wood, and be entirely devoid of knots,
splinters, and pitting. They should be free from distortion and rotate quite
evenly when twirled on the finger nail (below, p. 30), especially when you spin
them ‘with right finger and thumb’? as they rest upright on their heads?  fin
the centre of the right palm!.* The swiftest arrows are those of slim contour
with low fletchings and thick fore-shaft (musaddar; see Glossary). An arrow of
this description is termed a ‘candle- form’ (q4lib ash-sham'ah). It should be
thickest at the arrowhead and then gradually taper until it reaches its
narrowest at the base of the nock. The nock (fig) should be circular and of the
same size as the thickest part (badan) of the shaft. The most accurate arrows
are of the ‘barley-grain’ contour (gab ash-sha'trah) with a middle thicker than
the ends. They should be equipoised when balanced without head or fletchings.!5
Straight-hewn (mustawi n-naht) arrows are those of uniform thickness from end to
end, As long arrows they are inferior to the other two types, but as short they
are better than either. (Short arrows are presumably those for use with an
arrow-guide or with a crossbow as opposed to the normal ‘long’ arrows; below,
p. 29.)

310The nock should be of medium size, for a thick nock will slap the grip, and you
will then spoil your shot. The thin nock, on the other hand, is weak (and will
readily break). For short arrows the archer should put a thread around the
circumference of the string and then, dividing it into three, make the nock the
size of one of these thirds. It follows from this observation that as every bow
has its own particular string, the arrow nock should in each individual case be
one- third of its circumference. In the same way you also determine the size of
a crossbow nut (jawzah) and its aperture (i.e. in the crossbow). This will be
dealt with later. Khart arrows (?) are useless.*

1

311
Z i EALL


3 ' FIG. 14. ARROW SHAFTS I. Candle-form.  2. Barley-grain, 3. Straight-hewn.

312
24


ON ARROWS 25

313
ii


` Specialists say that the most suitable heads for both maydán! arrows and
jyaghig, or war, arrows are those with a weight one-seventh of that of the whole
shaft plus its head (nasl). Any- ! thing short of, or in excess of, this
specification is wrong. For, if the head is too heavy, the arrow will gad
(taharraka) on its descent to the mark, while if it is too light it will gad as
soon as it leaves the string. ‘This is quite apparent in the case of crossbow
bolts. The heavier the head, the more effective it is at short range, "but at
long range it will topple and do little damage!.?

314It is related that Jahir (al-Balkhi; below, p. 39) told the following story: ‘I
had heard,’ he said, ‘of a certain Persian against whose arrows no man could
protect himself owing to their power of penetration. So I sought him out and
worked for him for a time, though I was afraid to ask any questions. Eventually
he went out hunting one day. By this time I had joined the family and so I was
able to say to his wife, “There is something I should very much like you to do
for me.” *And what is that?" she asked. “Please show me your husband's bow,” I
said.  So she gave me one of his bows, and I drew it. Much to my surprise it was
as light (/ayyin) as ours. “Good heavens!” I exclaimed. “Can your husband pierce
any kind of armour with a bow as light as this?” “Yes,” she replied, “there are
two things about it which enable him to do so. Just look at his bowstring and
his arrowhead.” To my surprise the string was as thick as one’s finger and the
arrowhead exceedingly large.’* We have put this story to the test and found that
it is as Tahir says.

The most reliable and effective arrowheads are those which are either triangular
or square (Le. in cross-section; Fig. 15). These are for use in battle and for
piercing iron and all kinds of

315
Tang



316

Fic, 15. ARROWHEADS AND NOCKS

317
I. Yaghiiq from N.W, India.

2. Yaghkg from Doge’s Armoury, Venice.

3183. ‘Oh ? (From Saxton Pope, Bows and Arrows, Plate 14.)  4. Chisel-head from
N.W. India.

5. Maydant Em head (conjectural),

3196. Turkish A

7. Indo-Pessian nock.

320
26 SARACEN ARCHERY


armour. There are various types of arrowheads, of which the most useful are
those just men- tioned. The haydari head (a broadhead for hunting?)? is not as
good as either of these two kinds, Target heads (nugii al-ahdaf) should be
rounded.!® There is also a kind of head resembling an olive (Fig. 15.3), which,
some masters have told me, is the most useful of all arrowheads for battle and
for piercing shields and which in Turkish territory is used by archers more than
any other type. They also have an arrowhead resembling a chisel. Like the
maydant, it is cylindrical, but its tip is not pointed, On the contrary, it
looks as if it has been cut ‘obliquely’ from its "lineal! mid- point and tapered
‘to a blade! on two opposite sides so as to present the appearance of a scalpel
(Fig. 15.4). The edge "of the blade! is as wide as the diameter of the body, Y
have tested this head and found that it will pierce the laminae of a brigandine
(gargal)"! as well as it is possible to do so.

321The art of mounting the arrowhead lies in observing the following rules, The
head should be evenly rounded on all sides, no one side being heavier than
another.!** It must be so made that it is perfectly straight from its point to
the end of its tang (silám), the end of the tang being narrower than its
base. The wood of the shaft should be bored ‘right in the centre!!? to a
distance that is less than the length of the tang of the arrowhead so that its
end can be inserted into un- bored wood in its natural state (khám) (and so fit
tightly).14 The war head, and indeed any arrowhead designed to penetrate iron,
should be made of steel.1* In these cases the tip must be tempered, and a
fraction snipped off if it is intended to pierce laminae of armour!* (below,
P. 31). This technique is a well-guarded secret, and the result a weapon capable
of piercing armour plates and shoulder-guards.1? The heavier it is, the greater
its power of penetration.!* This is well known.


As regards fletchings (rish), there are different types. The best and most
serviceable are vulture feathers, after which come those of the eagle (below,
p. 31). Right-handed feathers make more accurate arrows and are suitable for
maydanis. Left-handed feathers, on the other hand, give a swifter arrow and are
suitable for flight- and war arrows. The way to distinguish the right-handed
from the left-handed is to put the nock of the arrow to your breast, and if the
feathers lean over to the right, they are right-handed, whereas if they lean
over to your left, they are left-handed (the converse is the case in English
practice), It is wrong to fletch the one arrow with both types.  It should be
fletched either wholly with right-handed feathers or vice versa. The rule for a
set (nadab) of maydént arrows is to have them all exactly alike. For when
feathers differ in kind none of the arrows are any good (below, p. 31). The most
useful fletchings are the makyál or ‘balance pan’ (?) variety?” closely followed
by ‘gazelles’ (below, p. 32). The longest fletchings should be no more than six
finger-widths and the shortest three, Fletchings that are long and low (Ja) are
better than those which are short and high ('ait). At their highest they should
be no more than a finger-width. Four feathers hold a truer course and give
better grouping and greater accuracy, but three are faster and give greater
range (asbag).*? There are some archers who use six feathers, three low and
small and three high and long, but too many feathers retard an arrow.  For best
results there should be one-half of a finget-width between the feather and (the
beginning of) the nock.?! The feather should be cut from the base, and the tips
left like those of a swallow’s wings.** On a flight atrow you fit only three
fletchings.

322They say that tail-feathers are better for an arrow than wing-pinions because
the latter will not lie straight on the shaft. Nevertheless, secondaries are
better than tail-feathers because they are more pliable (below, p. 31).

Every feather has a belly and a back, so see to it that fletchings are put belly
to back. For when they clash and are belly to belly, the arrow is ruined, as is
also the case if one feather is higher or longer than another.* An archer who
shoots arrows that are fletched (murayyash) with left- handed feathers should
aim for the right of the target and vice versa.?* :

323The centre portion of a feather gives a better fietching than either of its two
extremities. A


ON ARROWS 27

324
feather on a shaft should not be twisted (maftül). The further the fletchings
are from the nock, the better the cast and the truer the course.*** The same is
true of light feathers.**

In one of the Maghrebi manuals fon archery! the author says that the skilful
archer should fletch some of his arrows?" from the right wing and some from the
left so that if he is shooting and the wind then comes in from his left, he can
shoot with fletchings taken from the right wing.  If, on the other hand, the
wind comes in from his right, he can shoot with left-handed fletchings.  Under
such conditions arrows so fletched are more suitable and will not fall short as
others not so fletched will do. The author also says that one should bend the
rear end of the feathers*® in the direction to which they themselves incline,
for if they are bent over backwards (Le. as opposed to bellywise), they will
cause the arrow to gad. If one spirals them too much, however, the arrow will
fall short in its course. The best fletchings are tail-feathers.?

325iv

Archers differ on the size of the arrow an archer should use.?* The correct
measurement should be such that it will allow the archer at full draw
comfortably to bring the head of the arrow to the distal phalanx of the thumb at
the centre of the bow’s grip as the middle phalanx of the right index finger
(shahadak) is brought right back to the lobe of the ear. The right elbow should
be on a level with the shoulders, as also the hand grasping the bow. All should
be on the same level (ie. in the horizontal plane), none of these parts being
higher ‘or lower! than another. The optimum, then, is the length of the draw
(jadhb) of which an archer is capable and which will at the same time permit a
graceful appearance.?!* The whole person should be evenly poised by which, ‘to
repeat,! is meant that the right elbow, the shoulders and the left fist should
be on the one level, none of these parts of the body being higher or lower than
another.

326The length of the maydáni arrow in our time and country (i.e. Syria)** is, in
terms of the carpenter’s cubit, one and one-eighth cubits and one-half of a
girar (30 in.). Such an arrow is called tamám (‘full length"). This measurement,
of course, is intended for really medium men.  A tall man (with long arms) will
have to have it longer, while a short one (with short arms) will be unable to
bring it to full draw ('ajaza ‘an istifd’ thi) and will in consequence have to
have it shorter. The war arrow should be one girdg (1-1 in.) less (ie. than the
standard maydant).


v

327
To find the correct balance (awzdn, lit. ‘weights’; he means the correct
position of the centre of gravity), first place the arrow across the left index
finger "with the nock towards the palm of the handV** and balance it. When it is
evenly poised like the beam of a balance, reduce the length of it by a fist "by
grasping it with your left hand, your little finger being placed!* at the
fletching end. "This is to be done without allowing any shift in the balance
already established.!?5 Next, with another arrow you measure the distance from
the nock (kàz) to the little finger and then, by reversing this gauge, measure
the same distance from the arrowhead. If the point which was on the little
finger now reaches the left index finger (sabbabah)—some say the middle
finger—the arrow is correctly balanced (in other words, the centre of gravity
should be half a fist, or slightly less, towards the head from the middle of the
arrow). If ‘the measure! reaches beyond 'the left index finger’, the head is too
heavy, while if it falls short, it is too light `

vi ;

328The nock (káz) should be of medium size, neither too small nor too big. The
arrow for use

with the jarkh should ‘easily fit into!** the nut and neither shift about in it
nor fit too tightly.

329
To determine the correct balance of jarkh arrows and darts (nabl) intended for
use with arrow- guides, you reduce the length of the arrow by a fist from the
direction of the head and then place


28 SARACEN ARCHERY

330
it on the left index finger and balance it. If it rests there like the beam of a
balance, it is correct.  If not, what we have already said above also applies
here. As regards the galam (a type of cross- bow bolt; below, p. 29), it should
balance with the base of the head on the ieft index finger.  With the arrow
designed for the mukkulah®’ the balance is between the proportions of one- third
and one-quarter, the quarter being taken from the direction of the head and the
remainder from the direction of the nock. If it wili balance in this manner, it
is just right.

A heavy head is better than a light one in all cases, especially in the case of
arrows for use with the mukhulah and the jarkh and also in the case of darts. A
light head is useless. There is 2 type of bolt (nab?) with a tip of iron the
size of a small chickpea, the shaft (badan) being thinner than the tip and only
as heavy as the whole head.** The upper portion (i.e. the shaft) is of wood and
of the same size as the nock. To be correctly balanced, it should equilibrate on
the left index finger with one-third of it in front and two-thirds behind. They
say it will fly without fletchings, but fletchings do help it. It is designed to
penetrate armour.

331The more slender, or thinner, an arrow, the greater its velocity, whereas the
thicker it is, the more inefficient and slower it is.


COMMENT

332
Arrows may be divided into two basic types: (a) the long arrow (sahm sawil, or
collectively, nushshdb), measuring about 30 in. in length and designed for use
with the hand bow, and (b) the short arrow (sahm gasir). Originally intended to
be shot from the normal hand bow by means of an arrow-guide (majrá, mijrdt, on
which see Ch. 26), the ‘short arrow’ amounted to what we should in fact call a
dart. A term frequently applied by our author to darts is nab?  (sing. nablak),
a word which he regularly uses also in the sense of ‘crossbow bolts’. Measuring
about 16 in. or less, both darts and bolts were of a number of different kinds
and appear to have been named according to the salient features of their design
or performance, etc.


1. Long Arrows

333
(a) Yaghlig, or harbi. This was the war arrow, the head of which was virtually a
spike of square or triangular cross-section. This design was the most effective
for the penetration of armour and mail, Although well made, it would have been a
mass-produced article manufactured to a standard specification, unless specially
ordered for persons of importance. Before an engage- ment the ordinary archer
would have been equipped with a quiverful of selected arrows most suited to his
needs, but, his quiver once emptied, he would have had to accept whatever the
supply-train or arsenal had to offer.

(b) Maydani. As the name implies, this was an arrow designed for use in the
mayddn, or training-ground, in which the archer practised, competed, and, on
high days and holidays, dis- played his accuracy and skill before the ruler or
the highest officers of state, or both. Whether the term mayddni was applied to
more than one kind of practice arrow, it is difficult to say. It certainly
applied to the target arrow (salu al-hadaf). One of the archer's prized
possessions would have been a carefully matched set of target arrows of the
finest craftsmanship fashioned from the best available materials and identical
one with the other in weight and point of balance.  Though basically of the same
weight and balance as the war arrow, the target arrow would have had a length
and weight that had been carefully adjusted to suit the archer and the bow he
used.  - The head was round in cross-section and pointed either as an ogive or a
cone. An important and interesting reference to mayddnis is to be found in D,
where we are told that ‘they should be hewn from well-proportioned billets of
uniform length, thickness, and weight. Each of the batch should then be
equilibrated one by one after the manner of the beam of a balance to establish
the centre of gravity. This done, a mark should be made to indicate the point at
which the

334
ON ARROWS 29


‘top and bottom are brought into harmony one with the other. Whenever the marks
are found to ‘coincide in a number of arrows, they should be made into a set for
a round (#adab), At the shorter of their two ends they should be fitted with
well-proportioned heads of the same weight and quality, The fletchings should
also match.’ (Dt, 20a; D*, 49b.). -

335(c) Amaji. This was a type of mayddani with a blunt head which was used by the
mounted archer for shooting at marks placed on the ground (Ch. 15). They
doubtless took hard treatment, and for this reason are likely to have been more
roughly made than the target arrow. Limited

into butts of earth or sand would be assured by a blunt head (n. 10 above),
which would not be liable to damage in the same way as a pointed head; ~

336(d) Sabgi. This was the flight arrow which was used when competing for distance
regardless of accuracy. It was essential to have it as light and as strong as it
was humanly possible to make it.  The wood of the shaft would be carefully
selected and, though thinned to the highest degree, it had yet to be
sufficiently strong and stiff to withstand the impact of the string when shot.
There is reason to suppose that both long and short arrows were used for this
purpose. (Ch. 19.)

The technique of flight shooting, which is different from that of precision
shooting, was brought to a very high degree of perfection by the Ottoman Turks
whose arrow design has never yet been surpassed. (For details, see F. Isles,
SAA, vol. 4, 1961, pp. 25-28.) -

337(e) Haydari. In our view the term is suspect; it seems very probable that we
should read janwart ‘animal, for usc against animals’, i.c. a hunting head. (See
Glossary, s.v. haydari.)


2. Short Arrows

338
(a) Darts. References to these devices are frequent in Arab works on archery,
Although they would appear to have lacked the weight to penetrate armour or
mail, we can at least be sure that they were effective as a harassing device,
especially against unprotected horses of enemy cavairy.  Practical trials show
that they are projected at a high velocity with a low trajectory. This factor
makes for accuracy, and at short range they would certainly have been most
unpleasant to face.  At long range it would have been possible for massed
archers to put down a barrage of such missiles as far as about 400 yards.

MSS of the CD groups offer some information on darts. The following details have
been extracted from them (some versions are more accurate and/or informative
than others):

339
No arrow for use with a guide should be longer than 2 spans (shibrs) and a
digital phalanx ('ugdah; in all, about 16 in.). The war variety, that is, the
Ausbdn (*hailstones"), should measure 2 spans, while the düdZni should, with the
head, be 1j spans. The smaliest arrow for use with a guide should measure no
less than } span (about 2} in.). Into this category fail the types jardd
(‘locusts’), the length of which ranges from 1 span to $ span; and the 'usfuri
(‘sparrow-like, bird-like"). For best results the short arrow should be half the
length of the long, or, in other words, 2 spans. (C!, 32b; C*, 55a; C, 25a; D,
23a; D*, 52b.): From this last sentence it would seem that the long arrow was 4
spans long. As it measured 30 in. (above, p. 27), the span would be about 7} in.
Further information on darts may be obtained from Cahen, BEO, XII, PP. 132-33,
and Arab Archery, pp. 124-31, etc.  . .(b) Gressbow bolts. MSS of the CD groups
again supply some information. The relevant portions follow closely upon those
concerned with darts (see references immediately above, section 2 (a), and our
observations on the versions). The specifications that are given relate to
‘bolts for use with particular crossbows the detailed construction of which is
not known to us.  Those mentioned are (a) the 'aggar, ‘murderer’, which, if the
definitions of Cahen (BEO, XII, 152, n. 10) and Huuri (Gesch, p. 120) are valid
for the context, was a crossbow drawn by placing the feet on its limbs, and (b)
the rikdé ‘stirrup’, which, as its name indicates, was the stirrup bow mentioned
above (p. 19) as gatos ar-rikáb. The details may be summarized as follows:


3o SARACEN ARCHERY

340
Crossbow bolts (nabl gatos ar-rijT) should be the length of the distance from
the (fore?) end of the grooved guide (majrá) along the top of the stock to the
nut. (The length would have been in the order of 12 in.) For shooting at short
ranges they should be 2 fingers shorter, In the case of the ‘aggdr the (head
of?) the shaft should be level with the breast of the stock (sadr al-gadib;
i.e. presumably, the front end) for precision shooting and opposite the pin

(mistnar) for distance. For shooting at short range a bolt should have a
socketed head (baziak) .  of iron weighing 3 dirhams (142-8 gr.) with a shaft
(sam) of 6 dirhams (285-6 gr.). This is the right size for the rikab. For the
‘aggar, on the other hand, the weight of the bolt head should

341be 31 dirhams (166-6 gr.) and the shaft (khashab) 7 dirhams (33272 gr.). In D*,
532, it is held that an arrowhead with a tang driven into the shaft with glue
and bound with sinews is stronger and more effective than a socketed head (which
is always liable on impact to break the shaft at the shoulder of the socket) and
will admit of great accuracy. (Cf. D+, 23b-242.)


3. The Spinning Test

342
Both ancient and modern archers have used this method to determine the
straightness of a shaft. It is simple and effective and, to master, needs very
little practice. The thumb-nail is placed together with a finger-nail to form a
shallow ‘V’ ia which to cradle the arrow close to its centre of gravity. The
shaft is then spun with the other hand, If true, it will spin smoothly, whereas
if it is in any way distorted, it will rattle between the nails.

The technique described here is termed idrar by Ibn Sidah who says that, when
spun, the arrow should produce a lowing or whining sound that can only come from
a straight and correctly shaped shaft of sturdy wood (Mukhassas, VI,
52). Perhaps a ‘hissing sound’ would be a more accurate description.

343
4. Weight of Long Arrows In our text nothing is said about this very important
topic, but some information is offered in the CD MSS. We summarize here some of
the weights supposedly specified by the ever-quoted Tahir al-Balkhi (C1,
292-b. Cf. C*, soa—b; C3, 21b-22a; D4, 21a; D°, so0a—b. See also Arad Archery,
pp. 113-16, 174). The ranges given obviously refer to effective target ranges
and not to maximum ranges. (In the first column the weights are those of the
Baghdad standard, on which see Appendix 1.)


Arrow weights, etc. Bow weight Range | in Ib. in yds.  * 8 dirham arrow (3856
gr.)  30 ratl bow 26-8 100 cubits 54°5 8 dirham arrow (385:6 gr.)  40 rapi bow
3575 125 cubits 68:1 8 dirham arrow (385:6 gr.)  50 rat] bow 447 150 cubits :
81:75 IO dirham arrow (482 gr.)  60-70 rar! bow §3°6-62°5 160-170 cubits 87-92:5
12 dirham arrow (578-4 gr.)  100 ratl bow 89:4

344
270-300 cubits 147-1635


ON ARROWS 31

345
Specifications of arrow weights presented in a more detailed manner are to be
found in the uNihayah and have been investigated by us (Latham and Paterson,
JSS, X, 1965, pp. 253-61).  . {Since no figures are given for bow weights,
however, they cannot be compared with the above.  ‘The lightest possible arrow
is given as 304 gr. and the heaviest as 600 gr., the first for use with the
lightest bow, and the second for use with the heaviest.


5. Arrowheads

346
; —ÉU M — a TE” - information has been obtained. On the results of these trials
the reader would do well to consult Archery (Badminton), Ch. xxiv, S. Pope,
Hunting with the Bow and Arrow, pp. 46-49, and E. G.  Heath, JSAA, vol. 4, p. 18
(on the bodkin head).

The tapered spike, or bodkin, head gives the best penetration of armour or mail,
and this was -the type used so effectively by the old English archers against
armoured cavalry. The weakest part of this, or indeed any, arrowhead was the
tip, for, if too fine, it could bend or snap on impact with armour and fail to
penetrate. To a large extent, however, this hazard could— given correctly
tempered steel and a reasonably square hit;—be overcome by slight blunting of
the tip. When shot by strong and skilful archers, arrows fitted with such heads
were capable of an astonishing degree of penetration, and actual examples can be
found in abundance in Hansard's Book of Archery where we read, for instance, of
an arrowhead so effective that it not only trans- fixed the protected leg of a
horseman in armour, but even penetrated his saddle and went on to deal a mortal
blow to his horse (p. 200).

347The broadhead is of little use against armour, but is most effective for
hunting, for which purpose it was designed.

Two unusual shapes are mentioned in the text, namely, the olive and the
chisel. Although it is doubtful whether the penetrative qualities of the former
would be equal to those of the bodkin, the latter would overcome any possible
weakness liable to arise from a finer point and would be fully effective against
armour.

348
6. Feathers


In English practice a feather is described as right-handed or left-handed
according to the.  results obtained by viewing the top surface from the base of
the quill when held towards the person. If the web of the feather runs to the
right from the quill, it is right-handed, and vice versa.

349When a fletching is prepared, part of the quill is left on the base of the
web. If this is not

done, or if too much of the quill is cut away, the feather loses much of its
natural stiffness and, accordingly, its quality. We are in complete agreement
with the author that all fletchings on an arrow must be of the same hand and
that the centre part of the feather is superior to either of the two ends. There
are no valid grounds for preferring right-handed or left-handed feathers.

350English fletchers have always favoured wing-pinions for strength. The difficulty
presented by their natural curve (below) could be overcome quite simply by
placing the prepared fletching in a hot, damp cloth for a minute or two before
affixing it to the shaftment as this temporarily softened the quill and allowed
it to be fastened in alignment with the axis of the shaft. Tail-feathers, though
not as tough and strong as wing-pinions, are straight and therefore easier to
handle. The tail- feathers of both the vulture and eagle, however, have for all
practical purposes no weakness so far as the archer is concerned and,
furthermore, they are stronger than goose pinions which were those most widely
used in the West.

The web of a feather has a natural cutve, and even when a straightened quill i
is fastened i in alignment with the axis of the shaft, the arrow will spin in
flight. It is for this reason that the feathers on an arrow must be of the same
hand, for, if of different hands, they will result in

351
32 | SARACEN ARCHERY


unsteady flight and excessive drag. With a broadhead it is generally accepted
that a higher rate.  of spin is needed to counteract the effect of a side wind
on the blade, and in this case the quill is set slightly out of true to increase
the spin in the natural direction given by the feathers. Archers still debate
not only the merits or otherwise of using such spiralled fletchings for all
arrows, but also the question whether four fletchings should be used as opposed
to three. It is not the place here to enter into their unending controversies on
these points.

352The shapes into which feathers have been trimmed after being set to the
shaftment have varied widely over the centuries and in different areas. All the
illustrations and miniatures in the numerous MSS which we have so far examined
for the period which immedistely concerns us show them cut to a low arc of a
circle. As observed in note 19, the two names applied by our author to one type
of fletching are uncertain. In A we find makyi and aktaf. The first of these
terms (for which in B, er al. we have the apparently meaningless makbiif) means
‘measured’ or ‘a measure’, while the second means ‘shoulder-blades’. For the
latter the reading of B*, b$, and 5 is akuff ‘pans of a balance’, which, so far
as we can judge, could only mean that the fletching was trimmed to a contour
similar to that of the rim of a balance pan. Such a line would correspond to the
design seen in miniatures. It is possible, however, that we should read akzaf
(second vowel short) with the meaning ‘broad-shouldered’, which, from a
grammatical standpoint, would make better sense. It is also just possible that
we should take makedl in a sense similar to that of - mukattal ‘round and
compact’, ‘stout and short’, or the like.


Barbs-together forming the web | . . Nock

353



354
Quill


FrG, 16. PARTS OF A FEATHER AND FLETCHED SHAFT VIEWED FROM Nock To English
archers the feathers on thc shaft are right-handed (p.26)

355
The term ‘gazelle’ (ghizlan, sing. ghazal) docs not suggest any particular
shape. It is interesting to note, however, that our author recommends that the
rear ends of the feather be left like the tips of a swallow’s wings, thus
following the natural line of the rachis. This cor:esponds to the martin trim
mentioned in Arab Archery, p. 113, and it may well be that to some the
appearance would be evocative of a fleeing gazelle.

The Maghrebi writer’s view that right-handed feathers should be used when the
wind comes in from the left, and vice versa, should be disregarded. ‘There is in
fact no different in performance between left-handed and right-handed feathers
either as regards direction of flight or behaviour in a crosswind. On this point
we are supported by Dr. P. iia icles assistance we gratefully Sada d

356
7. The Size of the Nock


Taybugha’ s recommendation that the nock should be one-third the circumference
of the string is basically sound. Applicable to long and short arrows alike,
this rule would give a good fit, In D there is the following observation: ‘A
long nock gives.a more accurate and stable arrow than a short one, though the
latter gives: greater speed. The most appropriate lengths for a nock

357
ON ARROWS 33


ate those which will take the width of two bowstrings, or the fletchings from
their highest point or the arrowhead from the point where the tempering
ends. The converse is true in the case of flight arrows." (D+, 202; D*, 49b.)

358That the depth of the nock for the normal long arrow should be equal to twice
the thickness of the string is reasonable. If the converse is true in the case
of flight arrows, this may be taken to mean that the flight nock should only
equal one thickness. The point about the fletchings and.  tempering would appear
to be that both the height of the feathers (i.e. their breadth from the quill)
at their farthest. from the shaft and the length of the tempered tip of the
arrowhead should measure the thickness of two bowstrings. They could, therefore,
be used as a gauge.

In 5, 13a-b, the interesting view is expressed that in the case of the flight
arrow the depth of the nock should be one-third of the thread (used to measure
the circumference of the string), in the case of the maydani one-half, and in
the case of the giga/, or gighaj (see Glossary and Ch. 15) two-thirds.

359
8. Lengths of Arrows


The only right way to determine the correct length of an arrow for any given
archerds for that archer himself to come to the positisn of full draw and then
measure. Other methods can only give an apptoximate result, and some degree of
error is almost inevitable. For target shooting, the archer, then as now, would
almost certainly have had his own set of arrows made to measure, but in combat,
as already stated, he would have had to accept a standard length supplied by the
arsenal. It is logical to suppose that such arrows would have been made for
archers with the longest draw; for too long an arrow would be safer than one
that was short, the reason being that in the heat of action there would be a
danger of the archer's overdrawing a short arrow and bringing the head inside
the bow. With luck the arrow would merely glance off the wrong side of the bow
and be wasted. The real hazard, however, would be that he could put the arrow
through his own hand, or, if the head of the arrow was to hit the inside of the
grip, the shaft would break, the rear
