# On Bows

Although there are many kinds of bow, there are basically only two: the hand bow
(gaws yad) and the crossbow (qaws rifi), There are many kinds of hand bow. There
is the old "Beduin? Arab bow, which they used to

208
make of nab‘ (Grewia poplifolia) and also of shawhat, which is the same as
murrán (Cornus mas).  This bow was made either of one stave or two jointed
together’, The ancient Arab poet says:


I shoot with this which is all one branch and is three cubits and a finger.*

209
The settled Arabs, on the other hand, applied sinew to the backs of their bows
(yu'agqibina zuhüraha) and often lined the bellies with goat horn. Peculiar to
the noble Hejaz, these kinds of bow have neither siyaks nor "shaped! handles
(smagdbid).

There is also the intermediate bow (másitiyyah), which is made of horn, wood,
sinew, and glue.  It was so called because it occupies an intermediate position
between the Hejazi bow and tbe Persian bow. The Arabs also call it munfasilah
(‘that comprising separate elements ‘fitted ——

210The Khorasanians adhere to the principle that ‘the length of? the lower siyah
should be one-

sixth of the laminated portion of the bow,** the upper siyah being longer by as
much as the

211measurement of the little finger when turned down in finger-reckoning {on which,
see Appendix 4

below, p. 167). The working part of the upper limb would, in this case, be as
long as the archer’ forearm, and the Jower as long as his upper arm.

212The Turks, Persians, and Iraqis are for their part agreed on the principle that
the longer the siyahs and the shorter the limbs and the more rigid and slender
the handle, the better the cast (aprad k-s-sahm). Better cast is in particular
achieved by the slender bow (i.e. the flight bow; below, Ch. 19), in which, by
their rule, the limbs must fall back (? mustalgt; see Glossary) and the grip be
short.

` The best and most useful hand bows are those composed of wood, sinew, horn,
and glue (i.e.  the composite bow proper; below, p. 11). Its composite character
displays profound wisdom and august and sublime workmanship, for it is produced
after the formation of a human being and is of comparable structure. For even as
man is built on four foundations, namely, bone, flesh, arteries, and blood, so
is the ‘composite’ bow formed in like manner inasmuch as the wood corresponds to
bone in man, the horn to flesh, the sinews, which are intricately disposed
through- out its members, to the arteries, which are intricately disposed
throughout man's members, and the glue to the blood by which the whole is held
together. Like man, bows are provided with a back and a belly and can bend
bellywise like man. When they are bent backwards, they will snap, as would be
the case with man.* -

213Authorities on archery agrec that in our time the best bows of this type are
those manufactured


6

214
ON BOWS 7


in Syria, the finest of them being the excellent weapon known as the ‘superb’
(fahlah), which is the handiwork of the most highly esteemed masters (ustddi) of
the bowyer’s art. This is because

215
further and launch more effective shafts (ankd sihdm**) than any other kind of
hand bow.  These are facts which could be denied by no one but a person
unacquainted with a bow of this type or someone who had failed to get a really
good specimen. if he has one, the archer should look after it well and keep it
under constant supervisi

The proficient artisan is a man of experience with a mastery of the essentials
of bis craft.  Moreover, in all things capability is the essential. This is
particularly true of the bowyer's art,

216
A Nock (Fard)



217



218


ope pee j So ae f, Neck (Ung) Dividing Edge | — (Kanai) String(Watr) Arrow UA, G
i i Od ) a idi a e — ——- || Packing Piece (ibranjak)

219
8 SARACEN ARCHERY


for the fashioning of a bow calls for more competence than anything else if a
truly good weapon is to be obtained. Its manufacture also calls for more
patience, since it cannot be properly completed in less than a full year. Autumn
must be devoted to the carving and preparation of the wooden core (al-khashab),
on the one hand, and to the sawing and fitting of the horn (al-Eham;

220see Glossary), on the other. Winter is the season for binding and reflexing
(al-hazm wa-r-raf*),* and then at the beginning of spring the sinew is applied
(tarkib al-'agab). Next, in summer, the bow, as yet unfinished (Kham), is strung
and rounded to the curvature required (layyuha halgat**). It is then veneered
with bark and painted (at-tatoiz wa-d-dihan).

According to the consensus of masters with experience of the weapon, be they
craftsmen or archers, the mean length of a bow of this type, taken from nock to
nock, should amount in ail to one cubit and two-thirds and one-quarter of a
cubit (50-2 in.), the unit of length being the car- penter’s cubit, that is to
say, the Hashimi cubit, which admits of no variation, but is of uniform length
in all Muslim countries (Appendix 1, p.159 ).

221Analysis of the length of the bow should pe in the following measurements: the
upper dustar (d. al-yad) should be one-half and one-eighth of a cubit (16-36
in.) and the lower dustar (d. ar-rjT) one-third and one-quarter of a cubit and
one-half of a gfrár (15:82 in.); the grip should be one-eighth and one-half of
one-eighth of a cubit (4:91 in.) and be broad, not rounded (i.e. presumably, in
transverse section either ovate or elliptical from belly to back), so that it
may not turn in the hand, and, further, "to provide a finger hold',* be scooped
at the sides (Fig. 6); the length of the upper siyah should be one-quarter of a
cubit (6: 55 in.), the lower styah measuring one-quarter of a qtrár less (0-28
in.). They say that, like a growing branch, the thickest part of the limb should
be that adjoining the grip. It should then taper until its most slender portion
is formed by the tip of the siyah. The upper limb should be a little fuller than
the lower and, unlike the latter, not be weakened by curtailment (for, the limbs
being of unequal length, the lower must be a little weaker, if both are to flex
equally when drawn). The length of the bow described is intended for really
average men and truly medium heights as they are in our time.  Some people,
however, have shorter siyals and longer working limbs. In such cases the re-
cognized length of the upper siyak is one-sixth of a cubit and one and
one-quarter girdts (5:72 in.), the lower siyah being five girdts exactly (5-45
in.). The upper dustár will measure one-half and one-eighth of a cubit and
one-quarter of one-eighth of a girág (16-4 in.), amounting to one-third of the
bow. The lower dustár will measure one-third and one-quarter of a cubit and
one-half and one-quarter and one-eighth of a girdt (16-23 in.). "The grip will
measure one-eighth and one-half of one-eighth of a cubit (4:91 1n.).!?

Flight bows (gisiyy as-sabq) should have short limbs, long necks, and speed of
recovery ('sur'ar!  at-tarjih). The way to string bows of this type is first to
straighten out the curvature of tbe neck and dustár on each side (i.e. by
retracting the siyaks from the reflexed position) and then to flex
"simultaneously? and to the same degree the centre of each limb,®* For every ten
rapis $03 o. 7 Ib .) of bow weight there should be one dirkam’s weight (47.6
gr.) of silk for the string, such

222terial being raw, wound silk that is new and extremely strong. Such is the
information that we win on the subject,


ü

223
Crossbows are of different types. The- Franks, for instance, nan the jarkh, the
Maghrebis (North Africans) the Jagshah, the Persians and Turks the zanbiirak and
Islam (the Mamelukes?)  the bandiig,* Crossbows of this type (or ‘the
last-mentioned type’; the text is not clear) are the most useful for
land-forces. For naval operations, on the other hand, the most useful type is
that made of yew (zags). The limb of this weapon should be made of two opposing
staves (i.e. pre- sumably, one of two halves of a split length is reversed and
joined to the other), and its stock should be of boxwood or orange.


ON BOWS 9

224
In the West (i.e. North Africa and Muslim Spain) crossbows are a great favourite
and are the weapons of preference. Those who use hand bows, however, deprecate
them. My own view is that in the manœuvres of "mounted! combat, in the desert,
and on expeditions the hand bow is 2 better and more serviceable weapon, whereas
in fortresses, sieges, and ships greater power and advantage will be derived
from the crossbow.!?


5 !  ^

225
A


A

226yg

] INE '

227
Side view Front view



228

Fic. 6. Grip oF AN INDO-PERSIAN Bow

229
jü


The first thing that an archer must look at in his bow is the grip
(a/-gabdah). The main point about this is that it should be just right for the
hand and be neither too big nor too small for it.  To examine the grip, he
should grasp it with the whole hand and all fingers after first pushing back the
flesh of his palm away from the base of his fingers into the centre of the
hand. He should then look to see whether the tips of his fingers touch the heel
of the hand. If they do, then the grip of the bow js too thin for the hand. If,
however, there is half a finger's width or less to spare between the far border
of the finger-tips and the heel of the hand, the size is just right. A greater
or lesser gap is unsuitable, for if the grip is too thin for the hand, the tips
of the fingers will touch its heel, in which case the grip will turn in the
archer's hand at the draw, and he will not . Shoot well,

230If it so happens that the archer can only get a bow that is too thin in the
handle for his needs, .he should build up the grip by affixing leather tailored
to the size of his grasp so that the - grip will then fit the hand. In extremes
of temperature and for sweaty hands a piece of leather on the grip is
particularly useful.


20 SARACEN ARCHERY

231
So far as the power of the bow is concerned, authorities on archery are agreed
that the skill of the archer entirely depends upon his using a bow that is
within the limits of his own strength” and physical power. In time past archers
have only been concerned with those points on which they differed and prided
themselves, namely, technique and grouping (jam'), without anyone ever
mentioning so much as a word about the strength of the bow. Nevertheless, it is
said that one should not shoot with a bow unless it is less powerful than
himself and that no one ever shot with a bow that was even a fraction too strong
for him without its revealing his faults and in- capacity, doing him harm,
ruining his shooting, and emboldening his rival without his knowing it.


COMMENT

232
There is a striking omission in the preceding text: our author offers no
glossary of the termino- logy applicable to the anatomy of the bow, such as is
to be found, for example, in Arab Archery, Pp. 13-16. In the CD groups of MSS
the subject is discussed, but we suspect the relevant section to have been drawn
from some other literary source and inserted for the sake of complete- ness,
Since we have reason to doubt whether a¥ the terms listed were valid for the
time and place with which we are here concerned—indeed some may well have been
unknown to Taybughà—.  we relegate them to Appendix 2,


1. Old Arab Bows

233
(a) Bows of the Hejaz. According to our understanding of the text, three basic
kinds of bow were used by the Arabs of the Hejaz: (i) that made of a single
stave; (ii) that made of two staves joined together; (iii) that backed with
sinew and lined with horn. From some remote period the Beduins, or nomads, had
used the first two kinds, while the sedentary population had developed the
third. According to Arab Archery, pp. 10-11, (i) could either be a self bow or
consist of a single stave split lengthwise, in which case it bore the name fig,
while (ii) consisted of two staves so split and was termed sharfj. (The
technical implications of this information are dis- cussed in some detail by
Faris and Elmer, ibid., p. 11, n. 5 and p. 158.) As regards (iii), there is no
meation of its being a weapon of the sedentary Hejazis; it is said without
further explanation


ely really important point made in Arab Archery is that all these Hejazi bows
were basically a stave of wood shaved down.

234(b) The vásitiyyah. In Arab Archery this is said to have been the composite bow
(magni ah, murakkabah). One source quoted by Hein (Isl, XIV, pp. 357-58) speaks
of it ss the *Hejazi intermediate’ (al-Hijdziyyah al-másitiyyah). There can be
little doubt that it was the Arabian composite bow (cf, Arab Archery, pp. 11-12;
Hein, loc. cit.), but whereas all sources which we have been able to consult
agree that the bow was not, as might be supposed, so called after the city of
Wasit (on the Tigris between Baghdad and the Gulf), none of them explains in
which respect the bow occupied an intermediate position. After careful
consideration we suggest that it was intermediate, not from the point of view of
size, but from the point of view of construction and relative proportion of its
components, having perhaps more wood, but Iess horn and sinew, than such
composites as the Persian or Turkish. The difference would be immediately
obvious in cross-section. (A variety of cross-sections of composite bows may be
seen in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford. See also Balfour, £47, XIX, pp. 220-50
and RAI, LI, pp. 289-309.)

The question of old Arab bows, of which our author had probably little, if any,
first-hand knowledge, is a subject requiring investigation in its own right
since there is a good deal of conflicting information in our sources—one of the
most important is Tbn Sidah’s Mukhassas—

235
ON BOWS II


which cannot be considered here, Taybughi's interest js the composite bow of his
time and area,

236which can scarcely have been of Arabian provenance. He so takes the composite
for granted that

nowhere in his work does he ever trouble to apply the epithet to a bow, and
there is much to

237suggest that his knowledge of the more primitive bows which he mentions, quite
obviously

by way of historical introduction and from a desire to link the bow with the
Prophet’s native second-hand,

238
Hejaz, is


2. Construction of a Composite Bow

239From the foregoing chapter and the sources of information indicated at the end
of this section a picture can be developed of many of the details of the
construction and form of the bow described by our author.

The design of composite bows varied with time, place, climate, and the purposes
for which they were intended (war, hunting, flight shooting, etc.), but the
basic method of construction was the same throughout the East.

240The first component to be worked was the wooden core, which to a large extent
determined the final form of the bow and served as the foundation to which the
horn and sinew were later glued, This frame on which the bow was built was made
in three basic parts:

(i) The grip, or handle. This had to be relatively thick and rigid. A bow that
bends in the hand upon drawing is normally unpleasant to use, as it kicks when
shot and is, on that account, usually inaccurate. The thickness of the grip was
determined by its need to fit the hand.

241(ii) The dustárs. These were the two working parts of the limbs which took all
the bend. The wood in these sections could either be flat or slightly oval in
shape and about one-eighth of an inch thick along the centre line. The side to
which the horn would later be attached was, as a rule, coarsely scored to
increase the surface area exposed to the glue.

(ii) The szyahs. Working outwards from the grip, we find continuous with each
end of the dustars the ridged portion of the siyah. Here the wood was curved
towards the tip and shaped to give, in cross-section, a shallow triangle which
gave the structural rigidity required in the end of the bow. The width of the
siyah tapers sharply into the tip, ot ear. Initially the ears were longer than
in their final form, with temporary nocks cut into the *wrong' side to aid
manufacture (below Fig. 7).

242In details the construction of the wooden core varied according to the desired
final shape of the bow and the quality and characteristics of the wood available
to the craftsman. While we cannot be too dogmatic about these details, we may
say that in Turkish bows the grip was commonly fashioned from one piece of wood,
while both dustdr and siyah were formed, without join, from another. In the
Persian design, on the other hand, we find the grip, dustdr, and siyah made from
three different pieces of wood, and this method is sometimes encountered in
Turkish bows. Sino-Tatar bows almost invariably have a long unbroken strip of
bamboo for both dustárs and the grip. The latter has an additional piece of
wood, or riser, glued to the back to give the required thickness. The most
complex are the types from central Southern India, in which grip, dustár, the
ridged section. of the siyah, and the tip, or ear, were each made from different
lengths of wood, thus giving seven separate pieces for the construction of the
core.

This brief account will give a rough idea of the more common variations that can
be found in existing bows. Other examples of construction could be cited, but it
is not our purpose to penetrate too far into this field.

243The various sections of the composite bow were united by means of single
fish-tail, or V- form, splices and glued together. At the junctions between the
grip and the dustárs, and the dustars and the styahs, the abutting surfaces of
the wood were smoothly tapered in depth so that each section merged into the
other, thus making it difficult to detect the end of one section and the
beginning of the next in the finished article. In bows that have been stripped
down dissection


12 SARACEN ARCHERY

244
Siyah



245

^ NEN —

246
Grip


ee Mn Fic. 7, PARTS OF THE WOODEN Cort or A Composite Bow Dotted Jine on siyah
shows final form.

247
bas revealed such joints extending over a length of about 3 in. Hence, although
the actual grip might only be 5 in. long, the piece of wood on which it was
built could be about 12 in. in length from point to point of the two 'V's to
which it was tapered for fitting into the fish-tails cut in the dustars
(Fig. 7). Some splices exceed 5 in. in length, but a measurement of this order
is unusual,

In MSS of the CD group and also in Arab Archery, pp. 11-12, it is clearly
indicated that the wooden core was to be in five sections, viz. the grip, the
two dustárs, and the two sivahs.

248The width of all known composite bows increases at the place where the knots at
the ends of the bowstring are intended to rest, the purpose being to avoid any
risk of the string's slipping around the siyah, thereby causing the bow to
capsize. Too long a string, for instance, might well slip in this way and cause
the bow to spring violently back into its unbraced position. Such an occurrence
would shock both bow and archer and could easily do serious harm to one or both.
It was essential, therefore, that that part of the bowstring which ran from knot
to knot of the end loops should not touch the siyah. If the design of the bow
required siyaks so shaped as to predispose to this hazard, string-bridges were
often fitted to support the loop-knots at the points where they would normally
rest. Those from the Middle East were usually of bone, ivory, ot
horn. Disc-shaped and measuring about Ẹ in. in diameter, they were scooped or
hollowed in such a way that the sides rose towards the outer edges of the bow to
form small cradles for the loop-knots (Fig. 1o). Since no mention of such a
fitting has been found in any MS that we have examined, the recurve of the tips
of the braced bow would seem to have been such that this device was not
needed. :

The dimensions of what our author considered to be the best of Syrian Mameluke
bows are clearly given in the text as well as the length of the string it
required (below, p. 22). The only point open to doubt is the bracing height,
i.e. the distance between the grip and the string of the braced bow, Given the
length of the various components, the bracing height would determine, inter
alia, the angle through which the siyah was curved. A reconstruction is shown in
Plate 18.

249The craftsman, then, shaped and assembled the components of the wooden
core. Having regard to the rigidity required in the grip and siyaks, on the one
hand, and to the flexibility demanded of the dustárs, on the other, he could use
different woods for different sections. Our


ON BOWS 13

250



251Fic. 8, METHODS oF SPLICING (a). Grip and siyah showing splicing into dustdr
before trimming.



252

(b). Alternative method.

253
. author indicates that work on the core was carried out in the autumn, a time
of the year when the cooler weather and higher humidity would retard the
setting-rate of the glue and give adhesion superior to that obtainable in the
hot, dry summer.

While the glue was setting, the horn strips with which the belly would be lined
could be sawn and prepared, Water-buffalo and certain types of goat and antelope
could provide suitable material for the purpose. Since the horn of European
cattle tends to split into thin layers when subjected to stress, it would not
meet the needs of the Oriental composite bow. In dissected bows the horn has
been found to taper in thickness from between } in. and } in. at the grip to
half the amount at the centre of the dustár. Continuing to taper, it ends a
little way past the joint between the siyah and the dusrar, The thickness
depends to some extent on the proposed weight of the finished bow.

254Next, the horn was glued to the belly of the core, To ensure maximum adhesion,
the two , Surfaces were usually scored to increase the surface area exposed to
the glue. The horn was

"firmly bound to the core, care being taken not to press out too much of the
glue in the process, The reflex of the bow was controlled by a cord tied between
the two tips, and at this stage it was held in the form of a shallow ‘C’
(Fig. 9). For the glue to dry thoroughly about three months would be needed,
after which sinew could be applied in warmer weather. Warmth would be essential,
for on a cold day sinew is very difficult to handle and, if affixed under such
conditions,

255
I4 SARACEN ARCHERY


would almost certainly make for a poor bow. Hence the stipulation in our text
that work of this kind should be undertaken in spring.

256Some modern European authors, notably Payne-Gallwey (The Turkish Gomposite Bom,
p. 4), have stated that the sinew was prepared from neck tendon, but we have
proved by experiment that this is useless for two reasons. Firstly, it is far
too elastic for the purpose for which it is intended and, secondly, it will not
beat out into the fibrous form in which it needs to be applied, but will break
up into small pieces. (It can, however, be used when cut into short lengths to
build up the triangular section of the siyah, and we know of instances in which
it has been employed for this purpose.) Leg tendon, on the other hand—preferably
that of deer according to the findings of Dr. G. Fabian of Godolo, Hungary—is a
suitable material It can be dried, beaten out into fibres, and then impregnated
with glue for combing into a layer along the back of the bow.  It is important,
however, to ensure that the temperature of the glue is not so high as to destroy
its elasticity, which is sensitive to heat.

Having reached this stage, the bow was reflexed into a complete oval, and the
tips were tied together, a cord being led from the latter around the grip to
control the degree of bend (Plate 2).  The sinew was thickly applied over the
ridged portion of the siyah, leaving it, in section, almost an equilateral
‘criangle with increased rigidity. Of all the components in the composite bow,
the backing of sinew was the most important, and by correct application of the
material a skilful

257



258At a later stage the ibranjak is inserted here


Fic. 9. WOODEN CORE WITH HORN APPLIED

259
craftsman could compensate for defects both in horn and wood. It was applied in
one, two, or even three layers, but the full reflex was only achieved after
completion of the final layer.  Experience shows that at this stage of
manufacture the two horn strips, however carefully butted in the first place,
are almost sure to part, thereby creating a gap, which, if left as such, would
cause unfair shearing stresses to be thrown on to the bond between wood and horn
when the bow is braced and drawn. To remedy this defect, a slim piece of
packing—nearly always to be found in Oriental composite bows—was. inserted
between the ends of the horn strips. In existing bows it is of bone or
ivory. This component was the ibranjak (see Glossary, s.v.), the purpose of
which proved so problematical to Faris and Elmer (Arab Archery, p. 162, where it
is - tentatively suggested that it may have. been a shock-absorber). It is
mentioned later by our author on a number of occasions without any explanation,
but it was, as Mustafa Kani says of the chelik—the term applied to the ibranjak
of the Ottoman flight bow--the piece which united


ON BOWS 15

260
the two halves of the bow (Hein, Isi., XV, p. 263. Cf. Klopsteg, p. 115). It
served the additional purpose of helping to maintain the reflex shape in the
grip of the bow and of adding to its rigidity.  It should be noted that where
reflex in the handle does exist, it is slight, and the centre part of most
Middle Eastern bows is virtually straight except in so far as it is shaped to
fit the hand.

When the glue had thoroughly set, the impregnated sinew was hard enough to be
shaped with a file. After removal of any obvious irregularities and hardened
exuded glue, the bow was strung for very short periods at a time so that the
bowyer could study the curves of the two limbs.  The process of tillering then
began so that both limbs, when adjusted, might be brought to the correct
curve. During this time the bow would periodicaily be braced and drawn gradually
to increasing degrees until it could be brought to full draw with even balance
in both limbs. Heat and formers were used to assist in shaping the limbs. E a

261In the last stages of manufacture the sinew backing of the bow was veneered with
tree bark applied diagonally in strips so as to prevent it from splitting when
the bow was drawn. To make it waterproof, it was varnished and then painted for
the sake of appearance. A sinew binding beside the nocks strengthened the wood
against any danger of its splitting under the impact of the string’s loops at
these points when the bow was shot. Turkish and Persian bows are usually found
to have a strip of horn let into the tip to strengthen the ear (Fig. 10), but we
have come across no mention of this,

From our text, as it stands in AB, one is apt to conclude merely that a
composite bow took

262
Horn Insert



263



264
inew binding covered wit thinleather



265

ae

266
Ridged Section


bridge

267
FIG. 10. Siyah or A BASHKIR Bow (EIGHTEENTH CENTURY)


16 SARACEN ARCHERY

268
a year or so to make, but the wording of the CD MSS is such that we are left in
no doubt that each of the various processes had its own particular season and
that each and every one of the four seasons of the year was involved. In other
words, our ‘full year’ need have nothing what- ever to do with the time taken to
produce a bow, though it could certainly be completed within that period. (On
the view that Turkish bowyers must have spent about five years on the processing
of a bow, see Klopsteg, p. 52.) What, in our view, is implied is that each
process had to be carried out only at the correct time of the year, otherwise
the result would be unsatisfactory.

Main Sources: In addition to Hein, Klopsteg, and Arab Archery, see Balfour, JAI,
XIX; idem, JRAI, LI; Payne-Gallwey, The Turkish Composite Bow, London, 1907;
H. S. Hamlin, ‘A Study of Composite Bows’, in Archery,
April-Sept. 1948. Information has also been derived from correspondence and ean
with Messrs. J. Flinton, E. McEwen, D. Skinner; from MS notes of H. Ingo Simon;
from a study of sections of bows in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, and of the
H. Ingo Simon Collection (bows), Manchester Museum.

269
3. The Painting of Bows


Our author says nothing whatever about the painting of bows, but in D*, 108b,
there is an addendum to the text giving instructions for the painting of bows
with sandaris—presumably, Mum c, 2 colourless resin from the tree of.that
name. The directions may be summarized as

270OWS:—

Mix any desired colour with liquid sandarac, Apply and allow to dry off. Next,
apply a varnish of pure sandarac and dry off. Now coat the surface with strong
(? text uncertain) ox-gall. Apply .  paint of another colour to give, for
instance, white on black, or red on green, or blue on red, and then place in the
hot sun, When appropriate, sprinkle carefully with wine vinegar to bring up the
colours in the design and dry off. Next wash off the gall and dry. Now apply
sandarac by itself and leave. If desired, apply another colour in similar
fashion.

271
4. Dimensions of Bows The measurements given for parts of the bow are summarized
below. Those for the grip do not include the tapered portions fitting into the
dustars.  Column 1 shows the normal measurements as given by our author.  Column
2 shows the variations which he records. (A different set of variations is to be
found in CD (c.g. C*, 392; C*, 152), but since they are liable to confuse we
omit them.)


2

272



273


Upper siyah — 655 in. 5°73 in.  Upper dustar 16:36 35 16:40 33 Grip ; 491 » 491
» Lower dustár 15:82 y» 16°23 » Lower siyah — 627 » 546 55 TOTAL 49°91 in. 48°73
in.

274
It will be noticed that the author gives the total length of the bow shown in
column I as 502 in., so there would appear to be some minor discrepancy in the
figures. For all practical purposes, however, the difference is negligible.

The lower limb of Taybughà's Syrian bow was shorter than the upper, and,
although this characteristic is found in other designs, most composite bows from
the Middle East that have so far been examined have limbs of É equ length—an
advantage in that they could be used either way up.

275
ON BOWS 17


Compared with those of existing bows, our author's styahks seem very short and
his dustars long.  This would result in a slight decrease in the efficiency of
the bow owing to understressing of the materials from which it was made. On the
other hand, it would be a little more reliable in war and less liable to
fracture or damage.

276To illustrate these differences, we have drawn up a table of detailed
measurements made from 2 selection of existing bows. It should, however, be
noted that since it is usually very difficult to decide exactly where one
section ends and another begins, the table below may contain minor


etrors.  Bow Siyahs Dustars Grp ^ Toul (from nock) (nock to nock) Bashkir* à
12:0 in. 9:9 in. 425 in. 58-0 in.  Bashkirf 105 » 25 s 50 » SEO 5 Persian} 100
5, Ij5 s $9» 540 » Ottoman flight§ 9'0 4 9'5 » 45 » 4I°5 » Indian || FO y II'j
15 59 5» 460 5, Indian; 9'5 s I3'O y S'O s 5Q°9 » Indian** 9255 II'5 5» 4°0 95
45'°5 » Indianft 975» I25 5 AO 55 485 s»

277
The Khorasanian bow to which our text refers would at the most have been only 37
in. long, which is short even by comparison with the Ottoman flight bow,

The following additional information occurs in D+, 15b and is of some interest:—

278“They (sc. the Turks, Persians and Iraqis) divide the bow into half at the
halfway mark on the grip so that whichever limb is the weaker is taken by them
to be the shooting limb (i.e. the upper). The Khorasanians do not believe in
applying "too much! sinew to their bows . . . and accordingly use less of this
material than any other. With the Iraqis, on the other hand, sinew and horn are
used in equal proportions. This is because of climatic differences in these
countries.  Experts say that if you are in a very hot country, you should soak
the sinew with good, pure, well-prepared TOR glue because it gives moisture and
suppleness suited to such a country and excessive heat...

Specifications given by other authors cannot always be directly cotipared as
they may refer to a bow of different design from that described in the present
treatise. It is, however, interesting to record the observation of the author of
the NibZyak (see p. xxxiv) that the longest bow should be 12 gabdaks (‘fists’,
i.e. about 39} in.) and the shortest 8 gabdahs (about 26 in.). The longest
siyahs should, he adds, be 16 fingers (about r3 in.) and the shortest 1o fingers
(about 8 in.).  (Nihayah, Ch. vii, p. 72.) If our equivalent for the gabdah is
correct (see Appendix 1), the length ~ of the bow must have been measured by a
different method from that indicated by Taybugha.  It may have been based on the
shortest distance between the nocks or tips of the braced bow.

279
5. The Flight Bow


The mention of long necks in connexion with the flight bow probably implies that
the ridged section of the siyah in the kind of bow with which the author was
familiar extended a few inches-

280
* Colt. Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No, 0,7633.  1 Coll. D. G. Quick and
similar coll. E. McEwen. © t Coll, Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No. 0.7646.  §
Coll Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No, 0,7624.  i| Coll. W. F. Paterson.  *
Coll, W. F. Paterson.

** Coll, W. F. Paterson.

281Tf Coll. Ingo Simon, Manchester asin No. 0.7652.


18 SARACEN ARCHERY

282
further towards the grip than in the case of the war bow, thereby shortening the
dustár. That in its turn would give a higher speed of recovery to the tips of
the bow when the string was loosed. This would normally result in a lower degree
of accuracy, since the two limbs of the bow might not travel forward exactly
together. Such an effect, however, would be of no con- sequence in flight
shooting where discharge velocity is the all-important factor. Far greater
stress would also be thrown on to the shorter working part of the limb, making
such & bow less suitable for warfare.


6. Crossbows

283
In Arabic the crossbow is termed ‘foot-bow’ (qaws ar-rijf). The origin of the
term is simply explained in Mardi t-Tarsüs's description of the type of crossbow
with which he was familiar in the reign of Saladin: *.. . they (sc. crossbows)
are drawn by applying the pressure of both feet together with the strength of
the back, for, in order to pull, one must fasten around the waist a well-tanned
and toughened belt of ox-hide, at the end of which arc two hooks to take the
string.  One then puts the feet inside the bow . . . and with the back pulls the
belt at the point where the



284

Fic. 11. CRossBow WITH Corp AND PULLEY (See Glossary, s.v. jarkh.)  (From
Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow, Fig. 30.)

285
. ON BOWS I9


two hooks are until the string reaches the catch (gaff) located in the stock
. . .’ (Tabsirah, 88a-b.  : Cf. Cahen, BEO, XII, pp. 132 and 152, n. 12.)

286Another type of crossbow-— possibly a later development—required the use of one
foot only.

The foot was placed in a stirrup fitted to the front of the stock
(Fig. 3b). This was the gaws ar- _ rikab or ‘stirrup bow’. Europe distinguished
between the two by the terms arbalista ad duos pedes and arbalista ad unum pedem
(Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow, p. 60).

287Because of the relative instability of nomenclature and technical and semantic
developments, it would be unwise to be dogmatic about the meaning of certain
terms used by our author in connexion with crossbows. Some information on Middle
Eastern crossbows and arbalests may be derived from Reinaud, Huuri, Cahen (see
Bibliography), and others, but there is insufficient technical detail to enable
us to determine their construction.

Jarkh. From Ch. 16 and glosses in CD (e.g. C}, 22b; D4, 172) it is clear that,
so far as our author is concerned, this was the stirrup bow. It shot a bolt.

288Zanbürak, "little wasp’. What meaning the term had for our author we cannot
say. It appears, at some stage or another, to have been a weapon which shot a
strong, heavy bolt of the same name closely resembling the Western quarrel
(Reinaud, pp. 211-13; Cahen, 153-54).

Bandiig (more correctly bundug). This was the gaws al-bunduc, a type of crossbow
that shot pellets (bundug) of metal of that name (Reinaud, pp. 217-18 and Hein,
Isi., XIV, p. 304. There is further mention of the missile on p. 139). In the
present context the term is not to be under- stood as the firearm of the same
name (ET*, art. Barüd). (Nor in the case of zanbirak.)

289Lagshah. We have no information at all on this weapon.


7. The Naval Crossbow

290
Because damp sea air could have a most adverse effect on glue, the composite
construction with wood, horn, and sinew, which was often employed in crossbows
before the introduction of steel limbs, was unsuitable for naval operations. The
best solution to the problem lay in the use of the more simple, but more
reliable, wooden limbs. The yew recommended by Taybugha is one of the finest bow
woods obtainable, but there are problems in working it as the has to pay close
attention to the run of the grain. By taking a length of the wood and splitting
it in half, two lengths can be obtained with an almost identical run in the
grain. If one length is then revetsed and joined to the other, the two limbs
should be almost identical. In this way the.  bowyer’s problems are eased, and a
better bow results. Such is the most probable explanation of the ‘two opposing
staves’ indicated by our author.
