# Introduction

## 1. Historical Perspective

The rise of Islam and the rapid growth of the Arab Empire in the wake of conquests in Asia, Africa, and Europe need not detain us. The vital role of Persian and Turkish influences in the history of archery in the Middle East makes it more appropriate to begin with the overthrow, in A.D. 750, of the Umayyad Caliphate by the Abbasids and the transfer of the capital from Damascus to Baghdad where the latter first ruled (763-945) and then reigned as puppets until the fall of Baghdad in 1258. With the advent of the Abbasids and the growth of Baghdad, whose position along the main trade routes to Central Asia favoured eastward expansion, new influences from the Iranian cultural orbit penetrated the fabric of the Empire. On the military side - our central interest - the Arab warrior class gradually lost its importance and Khorasanians (in the regional sense of the term) formed the core of the army until displaced, from the reign of al-Mu’taṣim (833-42) onwards, by Turkish slave troops. The courage and martial prowess of these new elements evoked the admiration of contemporaries who have left impressive accounts of their skill as bowmen and horse-archers. From the renowned Arab writer, al-Jāhiz (776-869) we glimpse something of the Khorasanians’ military training in which, amongst other things, boys practised vaulting on to horses’ backs and men played polo, after which came ‘shooting at the sitting quarry, the hoop and the bird on the wing’. Of the Turks, he writes that ‘if a thousand of their horse join battle and let off a single bout of arrows, they can mow down a thousand [Arab] horse. No army can withstand this kind of assault. The Khirijites [Arabian religious extremists hostile to the Abbasids] and the Beduin have no skill worth mentioning in shooting from horseback, but the Turk can shoot at beasts, birds, hoops, men, sitting quarry, dummies, and birds on the wing, and do so at full gallop to fore or to rear, to left or to right, upwards or downwards, loosing ten arrows before the Khārijite can nock one.’ In flight, he adds, the Turk spelt certain death since he was as accurate in retreat as attack. To Ibn al-Faqih the Turks were skilled shots who could hit the pupil of an eye, and in al-Ya'qūbi, who interestingly records that their arrows were made of bone, we can readily detect an implicit recognition of their skill.

The advent of the Seljuqs and the creation of the Great Sultanate in 1055 finally established the power of the Turks. During the Great Sultanate, which lasted about a century, they were no longer a class of slave or freed troops, and the period is marked by the occurrence of a new and important phenomenon in Middle Eastern history, namely, the westward migration of whole clans of free Turkmens.

The Mongol conquest of Baghdad by Hulagu (Hūle'ū) in 1258 brought the Caliphate in Iraq to an end. In Egypt and Syria events took a different turn. At the end of the twelfth century the two countries had been welded by Saladin, the Ayyūbid, into a powerful state based on military strength and capable of combating the Crusaders. The régime founded by the Ayyūbids became the inheritance of the Mamelukes who rose to power through the military policy of as-Sālih Ayyūb (1240-49). Recruiting vast numbers of Turks from the Kipchak steppe and surrounding regions, he created from amongst them the Baḥriyyah regiment, an élite guard of nearly 1,000 horsemen, whose formation led to the creation of the Mameluke sultanate which in 1261 established a nominal Abbasid Caliphate in Cairo.

During the first Mameluke period (1250-1382), commonly, but incorrectly, termed *Bahri* from the name of the regiment, the Kipchaks predominated. It was they who, under the command of Baybars at ‛Ayn Jalūt signally defeated the Mongols in pitched battle (1260) and checked their advance into Syria and Egypt. It was during this first period, as Ayalon has shown, that the *maydān*, or training-ground, so essential for systematic drill and intensive training in the arts of war, flourished as never before or after. At its peak under Baybars I (1260-77), Mameluke training slowly but surely began to deteriorate, though, we suspect, much more slowly in Syria than Egypt. The role of the bow in all this was probably much greater than commonly appreciated by the orientalist, for in A.H. 733 (1332-3) the sultan an-Nāsir Muhammad ibn Qalāūn, probably fearing the strength of his amirs’ troops, ordered the demolition of archery ranges built by the amirs outside Cairo, closed *bunduq*-makers’ (meaning probably in this context crossbow-makers) shops, and forbade the production of practice arrows. The prohibition extended to the whole Mameluke sultanate. After this ruler's death rot set in, and the very first symptom of decay appeared when al-Ashraf Sha'bàn (A.H. 764-78/1362-3--1376-7) tried to arrest the process by favouring and encouraging military experts such as our author, Taybughā. His efforts were in vain. The Circassian sultanate established by Barqūq (1382-99) accelerated the downward trend. Generally speaking, training became more perfunctory, discipline lax, and adult relatives of the Circassian Mamelukes imported from the Caucasus began to infiltrate the corps without passing through the military school.

The skill of Mameluke archers in their heyday is legendary, and even after the advent of firearms the bow was not hastily cast aside; for not only was it quite some time before any kind of firearm was as effective as the bow but, as Ayalon so penetratingly observes, "To equip a soldier with an arquebus meant taking away his bow and, what was to the Mamluk more dis- tasteful, depriving him of his horse, thereby reducing him to the humiliating status of a foot soldier, compelled either to march or to allow himself to be carried in an ox-cart." In their eyes the importance of the bow was such that in the period of decline failure to pass tests in its use was used as the criterion for stopping the privileges of members of the non-Mameluke socio-military unit of the *Halqah* to which were attached the sons of amirs and Mamelukes debarred by the non-hereditary system of their society from making a career in the corps.

One point remains to be made for the benefit of those unfamiliar with the history of the Middle East. The military servitude of the Mamelukes should not evoke a mental picture of illiteracy and degradation. After the completion of a primary education in religion and the rudiments of theology and Islamic law, the young adolescent underwent training in the use of arms and tactics. His protracted period of highly disciplined training in the military school formed his character and outlook for life. Upon passing out and gaining his freedom, he qualified for the remuneration and privileges of a full-fledged Mameluke and might, if outstandingly able, rise to the higher amirates or even the sultanate. From the nature of his education it follows that in the Middle East of his epoch the bow was widely used by the literate. The fact that the contrary was the case in the West accounts for the late appearance of Roger Ascham’s treatise Toxophilus in 1545. There would have been little point in writing for the illiterate, from whose ranks the average bowman was drawn.

## 2. Archery: Technical Considerations

The bow has played an important part in history. Not only did it prove vital to the survival of the human race in early times, but-it also decided only too frequently the outcome of many great battles. Rarely do we hear of men trained to handle powerful bows being defeated by foes who were not archers. Even when Rome neared the height of her military power, Crassus and his legions were ignomioiously slaughtered in 53 B.C. when faced with the strong mounted bowmen of Parthia who could drive their arrows through the heavy shields and armour of their enemies.

Since a battle could not normally be won by archers alone, hand-to-hand combat being the decisive factor, the basic purpose of the bow was to render the enemy incapable of effective self-defence when further attacks were finally pressed home. In this connexion it is worth noting that the Muslim horse-archer was not merely a bowman; his prowess also extended to the use of other weapons such as the sword, the lance, and the mace. Archers of his calibre were the product of long years of arduous training, and it cannot be too strongly emphasized that to handle a war bow entailed great physical effort. Regular practice from boyhood culminated in the archer’s ability as a man to handle bows requiring a pull of 60, 80, or even 100 lb. to hold them at full draw. This quantity the archer *calls* the weight of the bow. Records of heavier bows exist, and rare men of exceptional physique have been known to shoot bows weighing up to 160 lb. Mastery of a strong bow necessarily implies that it be accurately shot, and accuracy can never be achieved without the muscular development needed for full control.

As the studies of E. S. Morse have shown, man has devised many methods of drawing the bowstring. History, however, suggests that the most effective for use with strong bows amount to two. By one of them the first three fingers are hooked around the string, the nock of the arrow lying between the index and middle fingers. The longbow of the Western world was drawn in this manner, and even today the Western archer adheres to this same method. By the second - employed throughout most of the Orient and of immediate concern to us - the thumb is hooked around the string and its grip reinforced by holding its tip with the index finger (Chapter 10).

The right-handed Oriental archer, who holds the bow in his left hand, must set the arrow on the right-hand side of the bow. The moment the string is loosed, the thumb’s pressure on the side of the string will deflect it slightly to the right, and the foreshaft of the arrow will react by pressing against the side of the bow as it begins to move forward. Should the arrow be placed on the left of the bow the head will be thrown to that side, and the direction in which the arrow will then leave the bow cannot be controlled. Since the converse is true in the case of the Western archer shooting with the finger loose, the arrow must be set to the left of the bow, The behaviour of the arrow when discharged is an interesting and important subject which may be studied further elsewhere.

Protection against the chafe of the string is needed for all but the toughest hands, In the West a glove was used, and in the East a ring or leather thumb-stall (Chapter 6).

The simplest form of bow is that made from a single piece of wood and tapered from the handle towards each tip. This is the self bow, for which few woods are suitable. In order to strengthen the bow by reducing its liability to break when fully drawn and also, possibly, to increase its cast, or ability to project its missile, a different kind of wood or some other substance suited to the purpose may be glued to its back, i.e. the surface facing the target as one shoots. When so treated, a bow is said to be backed. In the East the development of the bow was at some remote period carried beyond this stage, probably by necessity arising from lack of suitable wood in those areas where the development occurred.

When a bow is drawn, the belly, or inner surface, is under compression, and the back under tension. If suitable materials can be found capable of responding favourably to the resultant stresses and strains, great efficiency is attainable. In accordance with this principle the Oriental bowyer, forming a base from a thin strip of wood, placed a layer of horn on the belly and covered the back with animal sinew. The whole was held in place with glue and protected from the weather by a thin covering of tree bark, lacquer, or leather. Such a bow is termed composite, and the type is of great antiquity, for it may be seen in its earliest representations on the stele of Naram-Sin (twenty-third century B.C.) in the Louvre and on the Sumerian seal of Ibil-Ishtar (same period) in the British Museum. In the composite, it should be noted, wood plays a minor part, its main function being to provide a convenient way of joining the sinew and horn. A wooden self bow can, of course, be reinforced with horn and sinew, but this is not a true composite.

After some use most ordinary bows will assume a permanent curve, their tips coming back a little towards the archer when unstrung, and this set reduces the cast. If a bow, when made, can be so formed that it curves in the opposite direction, this design will not only overcome the weakness in question, but it will also increase the initial tensions in the bow and thereby add to its efficiency. A bow so made is said to be reflexed. By using the highly flexible materials of horn and sinew the Eastern craftsmen in most cases had their bows so highly reflexed during manufacture that, when unstrung, their tips even overlapped. With use, a bow of this kind would lose much of its initial shape and settle down to a shallow C-form upon removal of the string after use. Since such composites can withstand an enormous amount of bend, shortness of length could be achieved in design, and this feature made them very suitable weapons for the mounted archer.

In a well-designed bow the weight should increase quickly during the first few inches of the draw, after which the rate of increase should diminish as the draw progresses. This quality was achieved in the East by the fitting of a rigid end-piece (in Arabic, *siyah*, pl. *siyāt*) to each end of the bow. When the bow was about half-drawn, the *siyahs* began to act as levers so that the draw could be continued with less increase in the weight than would have been the case without them.  By way of example the Mongolian bow shown below is very close to its full weight at 21 inches of draw measured from the grip to the centre of the string. From there to the full length of 34 inches, the increase is only a few pounds. For a given weight at full draw - this quantity depending on the archer's strength - the composite bow stores a great amount of energy which is then available for transfer to the arrow when the string is loosed.

===RANDOM PIC OF A MONGOLIAN BOW===

When the *siyahs* project away from the archer before the braced bow is drawn, as is the case with the Mongolian and Manchu bows shown above and below, a string-bridge is fitted to prevent the string from slipping past the knee of the bow; for should this happen the latter would violently assume its unbraced shape and virtually turn itself inside out. This accident can happen with other composites if the string is too long, and the result can be unpleasant both for bow and archer.

===RANDOM PICS OF MANCHU BOW===

A bad arrow cannot be shot straight by even the finest bow. Its shaft must be true, resilient, well fletched, and correctly balanced. The main difference between the arrows of East and West lies in the nock which fits on to the bowstring. In both cases the fit must be firm enough for the arrow not to fall from the string. The generally thicker Oriental string results in arrow nocks that are slightly bulbous in shape and sometimes more elaborate in construction.

Bowstrings should be light and strong. They should have no stretch once they have settled to the bow. They may be made out of vegetable fibres, sinew, silk, or leather. Those of vegetable fibres are usually waxed to hold the strands together and to keep the moisture in the string. Glueis sometimes used for this purpose. All silk or fibre strands are bound in the centre (i.e. the serving) to guard against chafe from the arrow nocks and the thumb. When a bow is shot, the momentary thrust on the string as it checks the forward movement of the bow’s limbs is in the order of five times the weight of the bow at full draw, depending on the type and design of the bow. Such, roughly, is the strength demanded of a bowstring. For war purposes a high safety margin would be allowed.

So far only the hand bow has been considered, which is so called to distinguish it from the crossbow or arbalest (below). This last was widely used in both East and West, and the Saracens had a high reputation for their skill in constructing them. The advantages of the crossbow over the hand bow are that it is more accurate, requires relatively little training to enable the user to shoot it effectively, and is usually more powerful, giving greater penetration of armour. On the other hand, it is more expensive and complex to produce, is slower to operate, and cumbersome to carry.

===RANDOM PIC OF AN ORIENTAL CROSSBOW===

Although it can cast its missile over a great distance, it is really a short-range weapon since it cannot be aimed at a target much beyond eighty yards. In excess of this range the stock of the bow, the butt end of which rests on the shoulder, must be elevated above the target, with the result that the bowman cannot clearly see his mark. As against this, the hand bow can be aimed up to the limit of its range. Depending on the extent of his skill, the archer can use the technique of ‛underhand shooting’ whereby the target is viewed beneath the bow-hand. The method was used by English longbowmen who were trained to engage up to a distance of 240 yards. Nevertheless, to shoot at such ranges with any accuracy needs many years of training, constant practice thereafter, and experience to enable one to estimate range correctly and allow for the effects of wind and weather.

In most of the crossbows mentioned in this work the actual bow, or *lathe*, which fitted into the stock, would have been of composite construction. This was the case in the West also prior to the introduction of steel for such purposes, The most widely used method of retaining the string when drawn and releasing it in shooting was provided by the nut whose operation is illustrated in Fig. 4.

===FIGURE FOURK===

## 3. Muslim Archery Literature

The main subject of our book is the technical aspect of military archery as treated by a competent Mameluke authority several years before the last decade of the Bahri period. For more than a century sporadic interest has been shown - almost entirely by foreign scholars - in literature in the Arabic or Turkish language relating to military training and technique. In 1929 Helmut Ritter's review-article ‘*La Parure des Cavaliers* und die Literatur über die ritterlichen Künste' in *Der Islam* did much to publicize the store of Islamic manuscripts available for a study of this aspect of Muslim military history, and in recent years there has been a growing awareness of the need to exploit these resources. At the same time responsible scholars have recognised the obstacles to profitable utilisation of technical literature and David Ayalon, the noted authority on the military society and army of the Mameluke sultanate, has warned that in the present state of our knowledge this kind of literature is of little value to students of Muslim history. Until much spade work has been done, he rightly asserts, ‛the historian would be wise to refrain from using technical military treatises.

In the introduction to his *Muslim Manual of War* (1961) George Scanlon discusses in some detail - though not entirely without errors - the Oriental source materials for a study of Muslim warfare. The existence of this discussion, which takes account of the contents of Ritter’s paper, makes it unnecessary to cover the same ground in these pages. Something, however, must be said of archery literature. In this field the first significant European publication was J. von Hammer-Purgstall's ‘Uber Bogen und Pfeil. Der Gebrauch und die Verfertigung derselben bei den Arabern und Tūrken’ which appeared in the proceedings of the Imperial Academy of Science in Vienna in 1853. Based on the Turkish work of Mustafa Kini (below), Hammet’s paper, apart from the illustrations, which are excellent, is a disappointment. A good deal of its emphasis lies on religious and soctal aspects of archery, but from a technical standpoint it is utterly lacking in depth. Since the author did not really understand the subject matter of his sources, his translation of technical terms is not to be accepted without question, and we have preferred to leave his work aside. Incomparably more important is Joachim Hein’s ‛Bogenhandwerk und Bogensport bei den Osmanen’ which appeared in three parts in *Der Islam*, XIV-XV (1925-6) and ran into more than 200 pages. The work is essentially an analysis and discussion of the Turkish treatise *Telḥis resāil er-rūmát* (*Summary of the Treatise of Archers*) writen by one Mustafa Kani at the command of the Ottoman sultan, Mahmūd II (1809-39), himself a skilled bowman. While Hein rendered a valuable service by revealing to Western readers the essential contents of what is probably the most valuable treatise on Ottoman flight shooting, his knowledge of the technical aspects of archery was, as can be detected by the experienced eye, second-hand and far from profound. Fortunately, the German scholar’s researches attracted the attention of Paul E. Klopsteg, an American physicist, who combined expert technical knowledge with a sufficiently keen interest in the subject to prepare a study of those parts of Hein’s work on the *Telḥis* which he felt to be of interest to archers. Privately published in 1934 under the title *Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow*, Klopsteg's book was so successful that in 1947 he produced a revised edition which, like the first, soon went out of print. Its contents accurately reflect the essential interest of the *Telḥis*, which lies neither in target shooting nor the war bow, but in the Ottoman sport of flight shooting (Ch. 19). The author's treatment of the subject, which ranges from the making of the bow to the organization of the archers’ guild, is detailed and authoritative, and his thorough exposition of the manner in which the flight bow is built is of unique and inestimable value for our understanding of the nature of composite construction. It should, however, be noted that in dealing with matters outside the sphere of his specialty Mustafa Kāni relied on older sources which, as our own research has taught us, he did not always understand as well as he thought. Thus, in borrowing from his medieval predecessors - Taybughā amongst them - he often failed to discern textual corruption in the manuscripts on which he drew. Since Hein, it is obvious, did not appreciate this fact, it follows that apart from making mistakes of his own he transmitted those of Mustafa Kani.

Once awakened, through the efforts of Klopsteg, to the existence of a new dimension to their subject, Western archers with historical interests began to ponder the wealth of information that might lie concealed in Muslim technical literature of the Middle East. In 1945 their curiosity was partially satisfied and at the same time intensified by the appearance of a translation of an anonymous Arabic manuscript written in the Muslim West about a.D. 1500. This was *Arab Archery*, the outcome of close collaboration between an Arabist and an archer, respectively Nabih Amin Faris and Robert P. Elmer. Much that was new to the toxophilite emerged from Arab Archery, and its unquestionable worth as a source of technical information was enhanced by the inclusion of useful appendices, At the same time it would be unrealistic to deny that from the standpoint of translation and annotation it leaves room for some improvement. In particular, unfamiliarity with the field of Arabic archery literature and an evident lack of patience to explore it have resulted in inaccuracies which might have been avoided even by some reference to Hein. Only too frequently notes are lacking where they are most needed, though it must be said in all fairness that this criticism does not apply so much where important technical points are concerned. Apart from the fact that there is no historical introduction to orient the layman, there are too few diagrams, no bibliography, and an inadequate index. Nevertheless, we owe a great debt of gratitude to Faris and Elmer, as indeed to Hein and Klopsteg, for their most valuable role in affording a stimulus to our own research.

In 1956 a substantial paper entitled ‘Mamelucko-turecka wersja arabskiego traktatu o lucznictwie z XIV w.’ was published by A. Zajączkowski in the Polish periodical *Rocsnik orientalistyczny (vol. XX, pp. 139-261). Its contents, which are clearly relevant to our subject, include a Mameluke Turkish text in fascimile, introduction, and glossary/ Unfortunately, linguistic factors prevent us from evaluating its importance.

A work which is not primarily a study of bows or archery, but which is, to some limited degree, concerned with terminology relating to Islamic bows is Kalervo Huuri’s *Geschichte des mittelalterlichen Geschiitzwesens*. Although of interest, it has not proved af great value in elucidating the more important problems with which Taybughā's work has confronted us.

Some impression of the range of unpublished material in the Arabic language may best be derived both from the detailed survey with which Hein prefaced his study of the *Telḥis* and from Scanlon’s introduction to his *Manual* (pp. 11-14). Here no more than three works need be mentioned, and that only because we shall need to cite them for the purposes of comparison or elucidation. The first and by far the oldest, in that it dates from about the last quarter of the twelfth century, is a general treatise on arms, armour, and weapons of war, viz. *Tabṣirat arbāb al-albāb ft kayfiyyat an-najāt ft l-hurūb* (‛Enlightenment for the Intelligent on the Means of Deliverance in Warfare’) by Mardi ibn ‘Ali ṭ-Tarsūsi. Partially edited and translated by Claude Cahen with the convenient label ‘Un traité d'armurerie composé pour Saladin’, the *Tabṣirah* contains an important section on archery which Cahen did not include in his extracts, but which has now been prepared for publication by Antoine Boudot-Lamotte of the University of Bordeaux. The second, dating from the thirteenth century, is an independent treatise on archery of which the first part of the title is *Kitāb al-wādih* (‛The Clear Book’). Written by a certain at-Tabari, the *Wāḍiḥ* was one of the principal sources utilised by the author of *Arab Archery* and is a major work, offering, among other things, a detailed description of the teachings of the Great Masters as they were known to at-Tabari. The third work, by a Muhammad al-Aqsarā (d. 1348), is *Nihāyat as-su’l, ...fi... a‛māl al-furūsiyyah*, whose verbose title indicates that it is a manual of instruction on the art of war and military skills and techniques. The first section of this manual, of which a critical edition was prepared (but not published) by A. L. S. M. Lutful- Hug in 1956, is devoted to archery. It is comparatively short and, while by no means as important as the *Wādih*, it nevertheless contains information which we have found useful. Since its teaching belongs to a somewhat different tradition from that considered in our work, care must be tuken not to try and equate it with that of Taybughā/

To enter into a discussion of Persian and Turkish archery literature is beyond our present purpose. It should not on that account be thought that little or none exists or that it is of no value.  On the contrary, it does exist and, far from being unimportant, we have reason to believe that its investigation is vital to the solution of many problems raised in the more important Arabic treatises. This is particularly true in the case of etymological problems and matters of technical terminology.

## 4. THE PRESENT WORK

### i. The British Museum Manuscript

This book is based on the contents of an Arabic manuscript preserved in the British Museum with the shelfmark Add. 23489. Although it is undated, all circumstantial evidence suggests that it is not later than the fifteenth century, and itis possible that it goes back to the end of the fourteenth. Attributable to a certain Ṭaybughā l-Ashrafi l-Baklamishi l-Yūnāni, it is entitled *Kitāb ghunyat aṭ-ṭullāb fi ma'rifat ramy an-rushshāb*, or in free translation ‛Essential Archery for Beginners’. The text has neither been published nor studied hitherto.

The manuscript, which is enclosed in a red leather binding that is neither the original nor Oriental, consists of 139 folios measuring 27 X 18 cm. For the most part there are ten lines to the page written in legible Mameluke *naskhi* to give a text of approximately 21 x 14 cm. Although vocalized it presents a high proportion of inaccurate vowels. Originally cream-coloured, the paper is mostly stained to a brownish-grey by dampness which in certain folios has obliterated parts of the text, though illegible words can often be easily restored by reversing the impression they have left on the opposite page. There is some damage to the first folio, and towards the end small perforations in the paper begin to appear, until finally we are left with a sizeable hole in folio 138 from which anything that might have been of value in the colophon is irretrievably lost. A marginal note confirms that the manuscript is not an autograph (i.e. written in the author;s own hand), but a transcript. The version of this same folio bears the names of two people. The more important is that of a certain Alfī Qāni Bak ash-Sharifi. Written in a large, imposing Mameluke hand, the name appears to be the signature of an official, and from the use of the title *Alft* we know that its writer held the rank of Commander of a Thousand, the highest amirate in the Mameluke army. Although the signature is accompanied neither by date nor other useful information, we may note, firstly, that just such a rank was held by the Grand Master of the Armour (*amir silāh*) whose duties included supervision of the arsenal, and, secondly, that in connexion with events of A.H. 902 (1496-7) Ibn Iyās mentions a personage whose name and rank are identical with those indicated by our signature. The name recurs elsewhere as that of a member of the sultan’s entourage in 1514 who stood out in Ibn Iyās’ memory and whom he describes, amongst other things, as having charge of the arsenal. Above this signature is the name of one ‛Abd al-Latif ibn ‘Abd al-Qādir, who declares that after some searching he finally acquired the work he had been looking for, viz. Taybughá's *Ghunyah*. The date appearing with this information is A.H. 1085 (1674-5). |

From the title-page we learn nothing about the author. Below the title an ornamental medallion in blue, red, and gold encloses the *ex-libris* of a Mameluke Superintendent of the Arsenal (shādd as-silāhkhānāh) named as the amir Sayf ad-Din Jānim al-Malaki l-Ashrafi. These last two words indicate that the officer in question was the servant of the sultan who bore the title *al-Malik al-Ashraf* (‘Most Noble Ruler’). There is a temptation, for reasons which we shall soon see, to think only of Sha’bān, but it must be remembered that Barsbāy (1422-38) and Ināl (1453-61) were also so styled. Furthermore, the only amirs we have been able to trace with names similar to that of the original owner of our manuscript are two for whom there are biographical entries in Ibn Taghribirdi’s *al-Manhal as-Sāft*. Both bear the name Sayf ad-Din Jānim al-Ashrafi. The first, a relative of Barsbāy, who is described as having been a Commander of Tablkhānāh and, in A.H. 836 (1432-3) Commander of a Thousand, died at some unspecified date after A.H. 852 (1448-9), in which year he was stationed in Jerusalem. The second, described as Bearer and Keeper of the Inkwell (*damādār*) and surnamed Chief of the Corps (i.e. of Mamelukes; *ra's nawbah*) from the time he had held that office, died about A.H. 850 (1446). Whether one of these amirs is the person whom we are seeking to identify, we cannot say. Certaihly, there is nothing in their *cursus honorum* to connect them with the office which concerns us, but it is, of course, conceivable that such information as we have about them is either incomplete or not entirely accurate.

Briefly, the *Ghunyah* contains: (a) an introduction; (b) a didactic poem on archery in 149 verses cast in the metre *rajaz*; (c) a technical commentary on the latter; (d) additional sections and material not strictly related to the commentary, but relevant in the main to the subject of the work as a whole.

The introduction consists of a religious perspective of archery within the Islamic scheme of things and, more importantly from our standpoint, a brief, though irritatingly inadequate  indication of the nature, purpose, and background of the book. Here the author tells us that he composed a concise didactic poem on archery and that when ‛it was finished and proved to be a comprehensive basic work and a full, perfect, and useful authority', he complemented it with a commentary and introduced new material. Although the Arabic does not make it absolutely clear, he seems to imply that neither his commentary nor the supplementary portions to which he specifically refers were undertaken immediately upon conclusion of the poem, but at some later stage. If this interpretation is correct, any date assigned to the poem should not be regarded as necessarily applicable to the *Ghunyah*, but only as a *terminus post quem*.

From the verses of the poem we learn two things: (a) that it was entitled *Ghunyat al-murāmi wa-ghāyat al-marāmi li-l-mu‛ārd* (roughly, ‘Essential Archery for the Fighting Archer, Or All That the Toiler Desires"); (b) that the author's name was as stated in the first paragraph of this sec tion. Beyond the little that can be inferred from the name itself, viz. that he was by origin a Turkist slave imported from Greece and manumitted on conversion to Islam we know nothing for certair about Taybughà. The biographer Ibn Hajar, however, in his dictionary of notabilities deceased in the fourteenth century (eighth century A.H.) makes the laconic entry under the year A.H. 79 (1394-5): ‛Taybughā ibn ‘Abd Allāh, a certain celebrated warrior, died in prison in Aleppo.' That the subject ofthe entry is none other than our author is more likely thannot. The patronymic ‘ibn ‛Abd Allāh’ was regularly adopted by converts to Islam after recruitment into Mameluk service and is, therefore, not inconsistent with other information concerning his name. Secondly all internal evidence in the *Ghunyah* points to an author domiciled in Syria. Thirdly, the *Ghunyah* is definitely not the work of a theorist, but of a practising expert whose name, if we ar to judge by the number of extant manuscripts of his book (below), would have been well enough known in Malaluke military society of the fifteenth century to merit inclusion in Ibn Hajar’ ‛Who’s Who’

### ii. Other manuscripts

Add. 23489 is only one of a number of manuscripts which either purport to be Taybughā’s work or are, with or without acknowledgement, modified or expanded versions of it. In some case the title is lacking or differs to a greater or lesser degree from that already indicated. Out of possible total of seventeen manuscripts originally traced by us in reference works, fifteen subsequently became available for inspection, one in photostat, and the rest in microfilm. Careful collation resulted in a decision to divide them into seven distinct groups which it prove convenient to denote by the symbols, A, *a*, B, b, *b*, C, D.

Without pausing at this stage to specify the source of each of our manuscripts and their respective places in our scheme of classification, we must first explain as briefly as possible our predilection for Add. 24389 (hereafter A), which is, as we have indicated already, not an autograph.  It is in fact an undated copy transcribed from some other manuscript of which we know nothing, and, since it is probably assignable to the fifteenth century and therefore later than either of the B manuscripts, date is not the criterion. Nor is the accuracy of the copyist's transcription, for scribal errors, though not abundant, are yet not infrequent. Paradoxically, it is primarily the poor and, at times, truly execrable quality of the author’s Arabic that disposes us to believe in the value of the text supplied by A. Ṭaybughá, the imported ex-slave was not a native Arabic speaker and, in spite of his education in the literary language, laboured as a writer under the handicap of what he himself in his introduction terms his ‘barbarous Arabic’ (‘*ujmat al-lisān*). In no manuscript (apart from the defective A which has been copied from the same source) is there greater evidence of the latter, It is not merely a question of the usual grammatical errors - though these are common enough - of which the writers of the Mameluke period are so frequently guilty. It is, rather, a matter of linguistic inadequacy, which at times causes the author to express himself either in barely disguised colloquialiams or in such terms that his meaning is doubtful or ascertainable only by the use of common sense or, in more difficult cases, the application of technical criteria. It would be easy, but tedious in a work such as we are presenting, to cite numerous example; some of the more important can be turned up in our notes.

The text of *a*, an Istanbul manuscript dating from the very beginning of the fifteenth century, is a modified version of that represented by the preceding. Although it tends to drop difficult passages and misinterpret others, it does supply certain lacunae glossed over in manuscripts of other groups. It also adds some snippets of useful information.

In manuscripts of the B group we find a text characterized not only by a markedly higher standard of Arabic than that found in A, but also by fewer errors of scansion in the poem. The language is more idiomatic, there are fewer colloquialisms, and a higher literary standard is attained. To take but one example; it requires no great depth of knowledge or acumen to perceive that in hte written language *kayfiyyat taskhin al-qaws bi-n-nār* (sc. he should know ‛how to heat a bow over a fire’) is a more acceptable mode of expression than the semi-colloquial *kayfa yu‛ṭi n-nār li-l-qaws*. Another interesting characteristic of the B group version is the disappearance or the emergence in modified form of material or phraseology to which the more sensitive elements of orthodox Islamic society might rightly or wrongly take exception. Thus the archer is not advised, as in A, to show his fellow-archers ‘the affection that a dog has for its master’, nor is the formal plea for God's mercy (*tarhīm*) extended to include a horse that was tragically killed with its rider, nor need a minor seeking to train as an arher obtain his parents’ consent, but only that of his father, and so on.

That the text of the B group of manuscripts is a revised and slightly enlarged version of A scarcely admits of doubt; that it goes back to the last decade of the fourteenth century is certain. By whom it was produced, on the other hand, we cannot say, but we feel safe in supposing that it was neither the author nor anyone who had the benefit of his co-operation since certain errors, principally of a technical nature, can only be satisfactorily explained as misinterpretations of what was written by the inarticulate originator of A, whom, in the of evidence to the contrary, we take to be Ṭaybughā. Because of its early date and superior Arabic which, in spite of some demonstrable errors, for the most part correctly and lucidly interprets Ṭaybughā's meaning, the B group version has much to commend it

As regards *b*, a Leiden manuscript of indeterminate date, it is to the B group more or less what *a* is to the A group. There are marked charges įn vocabulary, and Arabic words tend to replace terms of Persian and Turkish origin.

The C manuscripts, the earliest of which beginning of the fifteenth century, present a text that has been revised and expanded far beyond the scope of the original.  Not only is the poem, with close on 250 veryes, noticeably much longer than anything in the A and B groups, but there is also an increase in prose content. The interpolation of material of doubtful validity for the time and place with which we are concerned makes this C version a trap for the unwary, and those not qualified to exploit it judiciously would do well to avoid it. If handled with caution, however, it can be turned to advantage where certain problems are almost insoluble on the basis of A and B texts, or used to furnish supplementary data where necessary or desirable. For the first time we are offered a date for the composition of the poem, viz. A.H. 770 (1368-69).  Although we have no means of confirming it, we accept it on grounds that it in no way conflicts with any known evidence. On the contrary, it falls within the reign of the Mameluke sultan al-Malik al-Ashraf Sha‛bān, for whom the work would seem, from dedicatory verses in B, b and *b*, to have been originally written.

The two undated manuscripts of the D group offer a text that differs in some important respects from that of C. It is probably directly descended from the latter and, needless to say, should be used according to the same principles and subject to the same caution.

Of all manuscripts known to us, there are anly two which, for reasons beyond our control, we bave not consulted, viz. the Cairo and Gotha items mentioned in Brockelmann, the first of which, we are told, can no longer be traced. In the absence of the original manuscript of the *Ghunyah* it seems very doubtful whether any other would have much to contribute to what we already know, least of all at the technical level.

### iii. The English version

Because of the form in which Ṭaybughā chose to impart his teaching a straightforward translation of his *Ghunyah* as it stands would make impossible reading. The poem as such would mean little without the commentary, and that part of the commentary in which the author follows the usual method of taking one or more verses word by word in order to explain the bare meaning before enlarging on the theme would bewilder and bore the reader with what, to us, are translator's note. To make the work readable, we have has to modify the text.  As a separate entity the poem has been entirely disregarded, while in the commentary the verses togeher witht he ‛translator's notes’ have been either omitted altogether or, if essential to the context, been paraphrased and woven into the adjacent fabric. Pious invocations, religious formulae, and sententiae in rhymed prose, so dear to the Muslim writer, have, except in special cases and for special reasons, been expunged as superfluities uncongenital to modern Western taste.

Having pruned the text in this way and in one or two cases - indicated in the notes - changed the position of subject sections to give a more natural sequence of chapters, we have left the hard core virtually intact and translated as faithfully as possible. When a literal rendering has proved impracticable, we have not hesitated merely to give the sense, or, if the Arabic does not fall quite naturally into an English mould, to expand a word or phrase to meet requirements.  The Arabist, furthermore, will see that our language is often more technical than the Arabic.  Where it is so, we have usually been guided by the need for clarity and brevity, and we have done our best to avoid ‘blinding with science’ by seeking out compromises. To illustrate, we feel obliged to translate ‘the crease at the base of the finger between the first section of the finger and the palm of the hand’ as ‘the proximal crease’, though we do spare the layman the more anatomically correct ‘metacarpo-phalangeal crease’.

The more important expansions of the text are enclosed in brackets, [...], and in no case where the text may admit of an alternative interpretation are these lacking. They have, of course, been regarded as indispensable where an addition has been made from another manuscript.  Short explanations not worth referring to the notes are enclosed in parentheses as also Arabic or other foreign terms, etc. Finally, notes of special interest to the archer are indicated by asterisked references.

One small but important point must be made. For the impersonal idea Ṭaybughā uses the second and third persons singular indiscriminately. When he passes from one to the other in a single sentence in which the one is in syntactical relationship with the other, we have brought the verbs into conformity with correct English usage. In all other cases the matter bas been decided largely on its merits, for without re-writing the whole text we cannot easily rectify the author's slipshod habits.

As regards chapter-headings, many, but by no means all, are indicated in the Arabic text.  Where they are lacking they have been supplied, and in Ch. 25 we have brought together under one comprehensive title several small sections, each with its own heading which is retained in sub-title form.

On folio 109b of our manuscript there begins a lengthy exposition of the rules and regulations of archery as a competitive sport. Much of this bears on the permissibility and implications of competitions in Islamic legal theory, and since it can have little or no general appeal, we have excluded it from the present work. All other material in the manuscript which is irrelevant to archery (folios 129a—136b) is also omitted.

### iv. The importance of the *Ghunyah*

Written at a time when the bow, as opposed to firearms, was still a primary weapon, the *Ghunyah* is a work of major importance in the history of arms and armour. Its indisputably practical author, who is clearly a master of his subject, makes a unique contribution to our knowledge of the Muslim horse-archer’s techniques, of which, for the first time, we have a detailed explanation. Next in importance are the specifications which he gives of the best war bow of his day and area, expressed in convertible measurements whose value we have proved. Thirdly, he communicates information enabling us to assess the degree of accuracy expected of the average archer without clouding the issue with stories of fantastic shots. Similarly, he furnishes data giving us a clear idea of the minimum discharge velocities of adequate war bows. The work also contains much new and valuable information on a variety of subjects, notably on arrow-guides and other devices, Not least among its merits is that it constitutes a standard of comparison by which the value of *Arab Archery* - which it often clarifies and not infrequently contradicts - can be more accurately gauged. Finally, it includes two excellent chapters on rules of practice and professional ethics which, *mutatis mutandis, are as valid today as when they were formulated.

Ṭaybughā did, of course, draw to some extent on the work of other authors, notably in certain sections which he evidently added as afterthoughts. There is every indication that he was acquainted, though more probably indirectly than directly, with the contents of the *Ṭabṣirah* and the *Wādih* as well as other sources which we leave it to others to trace and investigate.  What should be realized, however, is that whatever he transmits from others, he almost invariably transmits with the discrimination and understanding of one who knows his subject. In this respect he contrasts sharply with some whose technical writings we have examined and only too often found to be uncritical and confusing compilations masked by an impressive exterior.
