# Preface

Conceived as a contribution to the history of archery, this book is primarily intended for the toxophilite whose spirit of inquiry carries them beyond the sphere of archery as a modern sport into the world of the medieval warrior, for whom the bow was very much more than a pastime.  The hard core of the book consists of the translation and exposition of a work in Arabic written less than a century after the Saracen recapture of Acre. Of major importance for a fuller understanding of the weapons, training, techniques, and skill of the fourteenth-century Mameluke bowman and, in particular, his remarkable dexterity as a horse archer, the work affords a deeper insight into some technically significant factors underlying the success of Central Asian military irruptions into the Middle East. Those interested in Islamic miniatures will welcome the light it sheds on a number of technical details frequently depicted in the hunting and battle scenes so dear to the Muslim illuminator, while lexicographers will perceive from our glossary that it has something to contribute to existing Arabic dictionaries. The subject matter of the work, them, is of more than marginal relevance to Arabic and Islamic studies, and, this being so, we have considered the needs of the orientalist as well as those of the archer. To please two groups of persons with such widely differing backgrounds and interests as those dividing the majority of our readers will not be easy, and we are only too well aware that we shall satisfy only some of the people some of the time. Our Arabic-English glossary, for instance, may seem to archers to go somewhat beyond their requirements, and, elsewhere in the book, they may not appreciate the occasional discussion of some Arabic, Persian or Turkish term. If so, we beg their indulgence and plead the inadequacy of the dictionaries for the understanding of Mameluke archery literature. For their part, the orientalists may wish that we had included, say, a study of Taybugha’s sources or extended the scope and character of the glossary. If so, we plead the limitations of space which impose the need for priorities. Finally, if to either party we seem to make points that are elementary in the eyes of the one, it should be recognized that they are made for the sake of the other.

The complete absence of any edition of the Arabic text to serve as the basis of our work necessitated the investigation of a comparatively large number of manuscripts, For reasons which our introduction makes obvious, the problems they posed could not be passed over in silence, and they have therefore been the subject of a discussion which will perhaps be of little direct interest to the archer or more general reader. Again, the lack of a published Arabic text and the existence of a complexity of manuscripts have combined to impose the necessity of furnishing manuscript references. To remove the distraction which they might have inflicted if recorded in footnotes, they have been relegated to the back of the book together with such explanatory motes or supplementary materials as seemed to us, for one reason or another, to be out of place in the main body of our work.
